
Step-by-Step Medical Coding,
2017 Edition
Carol J. Buck MS, CPC, CCS-P
Former Program Director, Medical Secretary Programs , Northwest
Technical College, East Grand Forks, Minnesota
Jackie L. Grass CPC
Lead Technical Collaborator, Coder III/Reimbursement Specialist, Grand
Forks, North Dakota

Table of Contents
Cover image
Title page
How to use
Copyright
Dedication
About the author
Acknowledgments
Preface
Development of this edition
Introduction
1. Reimbursement
1. Reimbursement, HIPAA, and compliance
Introduction
Basic structure of the medicare program
Health insurance portability and accountability act
Federal register
Outpatient resource-based relative value scale (RBRVS)
Medicare fraud
Managed health care
Chapter Review
Chapter 1, learning objective review
Chapter 1, part I, theory
Chapter 1, part II, practical
References
2. ICD-10-CM
2. An overview of ICD-10-CM
The ICD-10-CM
ICD-10-CM replaces the ICD-9-CM, volumes 1 and 2
Improvements in the ICD-10-CM
Structure of the system
Mapping
ICD-10-CM format
Index
Tabular
Official instructional notations in the ICD-10-CM
Chapter Review
Chapter 2, learning objective review
Chapter 2, part I, theory
Chapter 2, part II, practical
3. ICD-10-CM outpatient coding and reporting guidelines
First-listed diagnosis
Unconfirmed diagnosis
Outpatient surgery
Additional diagnoses
Z codes
Observation stay
First-listed diagnosis and coexisting conditions
Uncertain diagnoses
Chronic diseases
Documented conditions
Diagnostic services
Therapeutic services
Preoperative evaluation
Prenatal visits
CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter 3, learning objective review
Chapter 3, part I, theory
Chapter 3, part II, practical
4. Using ICD-10-CM
Organization of the guidelines
Accurate coding
Alphabetic index and tabular list
Level of specificity
Integral conditions
Multiple coding
Acute and chronic
Combination codes
Late effects
Reporting same diagnosis code more than once
Laterality
Chapter Review
Chapter 4, learning objective review
Chapter 4, part I, theory
Chapter 4, part II, practical
5. Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-10-CM chapters 1-10)
Certain infectious and parasitic diseases
Neoplasms
Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain disorders involving the
immune mechanism
Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases
Mental, behavioral and neurodevelopmental disorders
Diseases of the nervous system
Diseases of the eye and adnexa
Diseases of the ear and mastoid process
Diseases of the circulatory system
Diseases of the respiratory system
CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter 5, learning objective review
Chapter 5, part I, theory
Chapter 5
Case study 1
History of present illness
Course in hospital
Discharge diagnoses
Matching
6. Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-10-CM chapters 11-14)
Diseases of the digestive system
Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
Diseases of the genitourinary system
Chapter Review
Chapter 6, learning objective review
Chapter 6, part I, theory
Chapter 6, part II, practical
7. Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-10-CM chapters 15-21)
Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period
Congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities
Symptoms, signs, and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified
Injury, poisoning, and certain other consequences of external causes
CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter 7, learning objective review
Chapter 7, part I, theory
Chapter 7, part II, practical
3. CPT and HCPCS
8. Introduction to CPT
The purpose of the CPT manual
Updating the CPT manual
CPT manual format
Starting with the index
Chapter Review
Chapter 8, learning objective review
Chapter 8, part I, theory
Chapter 8, part II, practical
9. Introduction to the level II national codes (HCPCS)
History of national level codes
Updating the HCPCS manual
HCPCS format
National physician fee schedule
Chapter Review
Chapter 9, learning objective review
Chapter 9, part I, theory
Chapter 9, part II, practical
10. Modifiers
CPT modifiers
Chapter Review
Chapter 10, learning objective review
Chapter 10, part I, theory
Chapter 10, part II, practical
11. Evaluation and management (E/M) services
Contents of the E/M section
Three factors of E/M codes
Various levels of E/M service
An E/M code example
Using the E/M codes
Documentation guidelines
Chapter Review
Chapter 11, learning objective review
Chapter 11, part I, theory
Chapter 11, part II, practical
12. Anesthesia
Types of anesthesia
Anesthesia section format
Formula for anesthesia payment
Concurrent modifiers
Unlisted anesthesia code
Other reporting
Chapter Review
Chapter 12, learning objective review
Chapter 12, part I, theory
Chapter 12, part II, practical
13. Surgery guidelines and general surgery
Introduction to the surgery section
Notes and guidelines
Unlisted procedures
Special reports
Separate procedure
Surgical package
General subsection
Chapter Review
Chapter 13, learning objective review
Chapter 13, part I, theory
Chapter 13, part II, practical
14. Integumentary system
Integumentary system
Format
Skin, subcutaneous, and accessory structures
Nails
Repair (closure)
Burns
Destruction
Breast procedures
Chapter Review
Chapter 14, learning objective review
Chapter 14, part I, theory
Chapter 14, part II, practical
15. Musculoskeletal system
Format
Fractures and dislocations
General
Application of casts and strapping
Endoscopy/arthroscopy
Chapter Review
Chapter 15, learning objective review
Chapter 15, part I, theory
Chapter 15, part II, practical
16. Respiratory system
Format
Endoscopy
Nose
Accessory sinuses
Larynx
Trachea/bronchi
Lungs and pleura
Chapter Review
Chapter 16, learning objective review
Chapter 16, part I, theory
Chapter 16, part II, practical
17. Cardiovascular system
Coding highlights
Cardiovascular coding in the surgery section
Cardiovascular coding in the medicine section
Cardiovascular coding in the radiology section
Chapter Review
Chapter 17, learning objective review
Chapter 17, part I, theory
Chapter 17, part II, practical
18. Hemic, lymphatic, mediastinum, and diaphragm
Hemic and lymphatic systems
Mediastinum and diaphragm
Chapter Review
Chapter 18, learning objective review
Chapter 18, part I, theory
Chapter 18, part II, practical
19. Digestive system
Format
Lips
Vestibule of mouth
Tongue and floor of mouth
Dentoalveolar structures
Palate and uvula
Salivary gland and ducts
Pharynx, adenoids, and tonsils
Esophagus
Stomach
Intestines (except rectum)
Meckel’s diverticulum and the mesentery
Appendix
Colon and rectum
Anus
Liver
Biliary tract
Pancreas
Abdomen, peritoneum, and omentum
Chapter Review
Chapter 19, learning objective review
Chapter 19, part I, theory
Chapter 19, part II, practical
20. Urinary and male genital systems
Urinary system
Male genital system
Chapter Review
Chapter 20 learning objective review
Chapter 20, part I, theory
Chapter 20, part II, practical
21. Reproductive, intersex surgery, female genital system, and
maternity care and delivery
Reproductive system procedures
Intersex surgery
Female genital system
Maternity care and delivery
Chapter Review
Chapter 21 learning objective review
Chapter 21, part I, theory
Chapter 21, part II, practical
22. Endocrine and nervous systems
Endocrine system
Nervous system
Chapter Review
Chapter 22 learning objective review
Chapter 22, part I, theory
Chapter 22, part II, practical
23. Eye, ocular adnexa, auditory, and operating microscope
Eye and ocular adnexa
Auditory system
Operating microscope
Chapter Review
Chapter 23 learning objective review
Chapter 23, part I, theory
Chapter 23, part II, practical
24. Radiology
Format
Radiology terminology
Terms
Planes
Guidelines
Diagnostic radiology
Breast, mammography
Diagnostic ultrasound
Radiation oncology
Nuclear medicine
Chapter Review
Chapter 24, learning objective review
Chapter 24, part I, theory
Chapter 24, part II, practical
25. Pathology/laboratory
Format
Organ or disease-oriented panels
Drug assay
Therapeutic drug assays
Evocative/suppression testing
Consultations (clinical pathology)
Urinalysis, molecular pathology, and chemistry
Hematology and coagulation
Immunology
Transfusion medicine
Microbiology
Anatomic pathology
Cytopathology and cytogenic studies
Surgical pathology
Other procedures
Chapter Review
Chapter 25, learning objective review
Chapter 25, part I, theory
Chapter 25, part II, practical
26. Medicine
Format
Introduction to immunizations
Psychiatry
Biofeedback
Dialysis
Gastroenterology
Ophthalmology
Special otorhinolaryngologic services
Cardiovascular
Pulmonary
Allergy and clinical immunology
Endocrinology
Neurology and neuromuscular procedures
Central nervous system assessments/tests
Health and behavior assessment/intervention
Hydration
Chemotherapy administration
Photodynamic therapy
Special dermatological procedures
Physical medicine and rehabilitation
Medical nutrition therapy
Osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT)
Chiropractic manipulative treatment (CMT)
Non-face-to-face nonphysician services
Special services, procedures, and reports
Other services and procedures
Home health procedures/services
Medication therapy management services
Chapter Review
Chapter 26, learning objective review
Chapter 26, part I, theory
Chapter 26, part II, practical
4. Inpatient Coding
27. Inpatient coding
Differences between inpatient and outpatient coding
Selection of principal diagnosis
Reporting additional diagnoses
Present on admission (POA)
Development of the ICD-10-PCS
CHAPTER REVIEW
Chapter 27 learning objective review
Chapter 27, part I, theory
Chapter 27, part II, practical
Online resources
Exercise answers
Quick check answers
Toolbox answers
Learning objective review answers
EHR screens
Glossary
Figure credits
Coder s index 0
Coder s index 1
Index
How to use
 
 
Copyright
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
STEP-BY-STEP MEDICAL CODING, 2017 EDITION ISBN: 978-0-323-
43082-1 ISSN: 2210-6529
Copyright © 2017, Elsevier Inc. All Rights Reserved.Previous
editions copyrighted 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013, 2012, 2011, 2010, 2009,
2008, 2007, 2006, 2005, 2004, 2002, 2000, 1998, 1996.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on
how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s
permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as
the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency,
can be found at our website 
www.elsevier.com/permissions
.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are
protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be
noted herein).
NOTE: The 
2017 ICD-10-CM
 and 
2017 ICD-10-PCS
 were used in
preparing this text.
NOTE: 
Current Procedural Terminology, 2017,
 was used in preparing
this text.
Current Procedural Terminology
 (CPT) is copyright 2016 American
Medical Association. All Rights Reserved. No fee schedules, basic
units, relative values, or related listings are included in CPT. The
AMA assumes no liability for the data contained herein. Applicable
FARS/DFARS restrictions apply to government use.
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As
new research and experience broaden our understanding, changes in
research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may
become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own
experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information,
methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such
information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety
and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a
professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified,
readers are advised to check the most current information provided
(i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product
to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the
method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is
the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience
and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine
dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to
take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the
authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any injury
and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any
methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material
herein.
International Standard Book Number: 978-0-323-43082-1
Director, Private Sector Education & Professional/Reference: 
Jeanne R.
Olson
Content Development Manager: 
Luke Held
Senior Content Development Specialist: 
Joshua S. Rapplean
Publishing Services Manager: 
Julie Eddy
Book Production Specialist: 
Celeste Clingan
Project Manager: 
Abigail Bradberry
Manager, Art & Design: 
Julia Dummitt
Printed in Canada
Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Dedication
To the students, whose drive and determination to learn serve as our endless
source of inspiration and enrichment.
To teachers, whose contributions are immense and workloads daunting.
May this work make your preparation for class a little easier.
 
Carol J. Buck
 
Jackie L. Grass
About the author
Carol J. Buck, MS, CPC, CCS-P,
 is a leading coding author and
educator. Her 
Step
 series of textbooks were the first in the market to
help coders and coding students develop their skills to advanced and
specialized levels. Carol has dedicated herself to the growth and
advancement of the coding profession.
Carol has a Master’s degree in Education, as well as CPC and CCS-P
national coding certifications. She began authoring textbooks when
she was Program Director of the Medical Secretarial programs at
Northwest Technical College in Minnesota, recognizing the need for
classroom texts that could be used to teach medical coding. It was
then that she began developing classroom lectures, abstracting
medical reports, and compiling materials to prepare her students for
careers as medical coders. These materials later became 
Step-by-Step
Medical Coding
.
Carol has expanded on the original text with a line of annual
products for advanced coding, certification, specialization, and
reference manuals, providing quality educational materials from the
first day of a coding program to preparation for national certification.
To meet the needs of practicing coders, Carol and Elsevier produce
professional editions of ICD-10-CM, ICD-10-PCS, and HCPCS
references, designed by coders for coders, with unique features such
as color tables and the 
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
.
From the classroom to the workplace, from application to
certification, Carol J. Buck and Elsevier are the trusted names for
coding education, practice, and professionalism.
Jackie L. Grass, CPC,
 has been a Certified Professional Coder and
Medical Assistant for over 20 years. Jackie has also served as an
instructor at the Minnesota Northland Technical College in the
medical clerical and medical assistant programs. Jackie is employed
by a large medical health system as a Senior Coder III and
Reimbursement Specialist, specializing in multi-specialty coding and
multi-payer denial review in both the inpatient and outpatient
settings. She also serves as a trainer and mentor to the coders.
Since the inception of 
Step-by-Step Medical Coding,
 Jackie has been
involved in the development and review of the texts, serving as both a
developer and reviewer. Jackie is now the Senior Lead Technical
Collaborator for the entire line of Buck Books.
Acknowledgments
This book was developed in collaboration with educators and
employers in an attempt to meet the needs of students preparing for
careers in the medical coding allied health profession. Obtaining
employers’ input about the knowledge, skills, and abilities desired of
entry-level coding employees benefits educators tremendously. This
text is an endeavor to use this information to better prepare our
students.
There are several other people who deserve special thanks for their
efforts in making this text possible.
Patricia Cordy Henricksen,
 Query Manager, who graciously lends
her amazing knowledge and attention to detail to the query process.
Her dedication to excellence consistently improves this work.
Nancy Maguire,
 for her dedication to superior education and her
lifetime of devotion to the coding career.
Kathleen Buchda,
 ICD-10-CM Consultant, for her exceptional
knowledge of coding and reimbursement and her amazing dedication
to the review process of educational materials.
Jeanne R. Olson,
 Director, Private Sector Education &
Professional/Reference, who maintains an excellent sense of humor
and is a valued member of the team. 
Josh Rapplean,
 Senior Content
Development Specialist, who manages the developmental duties of
this text with calm, confidence, and tremendous efficiency. 
Megan
Knight,
 Project Manager, Graphic World, who has assumed
responsibility for many projects while maintaining a high degree of
professionalism.
Preface
Thank you for purchasing 
Step-by-Step Medical Coding
, the leading
textbook for medical coding education. This 2017 edition has been
carefully reviewed and updated with the latest content, making it the
most current textbook for your class. The author and publisher have
made every effort to equip you with skills and tools you will need to
succeed on the job. To this end, 
Step-by-Step Medical Coding
 presents
essential information for all major health care coding systems and
covers the skills needed to be a successful medical coder. No other text
on the market brings together such thorough coverage of the coding
systems in one source.
Organization of this textbook
Developed in collaboration with employers and educators, 
Step-by-
Step Medical Coding, 2017 Edition
, takes a practical approach to training
for a successful career in medical coding. The text is divided into four
units covering Reimbursement, ICD-10-CM, CPT and HCPCS, and
Inpatient Coding.
Unit 1, Reimbursement,
 is a chapter that introduces the
reimbursement, HIPAA, and compliance processes, noting the
connections between coding and reimbursement.
Unit 2, ICD-10-CM,
 provides an overview of the ICD-10-CM codes
and their use in medical coding. A highlight of this unit is the
inclusion of the 
ICD-10-CM Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
within the chapter text, as they apply to the content.
Unit 3, CPT and HCPCS,
 begins with an introduction to the CPT
manual, followed by an in-depth explanation of the sections found in
the code set. Organized by body systems to follow the CPT codes, the
chapters include important information about anatomy, terminology,
and various procedures, as well as demonstrations and examples of
how to code each service.
Unit 4, Inpatient Coding,
 provides an overview of reporting facility
services provided to patients in acute inpatient facilities and the
reporting of these services with ICD-10-PCS procedures codes.
Some of the CPT code descriptions for physician services include
physician extender services. Physician extenders, such as nurse
practitioners, physician assistants, and nurse anesthetists, etc.,
provide medical services typically performed by a physician. Within
this educational material the term “physician” may include “and
other qualified health care professionals” depending on the code.
Refer to the official CPT
®
 code descriptions and guidelines to
determine codes that are appropriate to report services provided by
non-physician practitioners.
Distinctive features of our approach
This book was designed to be the first step in your coding career, and
it has many unique features to help you along the way.
■
 The repetition of skills in each chapter reinforces the material and
creates a logical progression for learning and applying each skill—a
truly “step-by-step” approach!
■
 In-text exercises further reinforce important concepts and allow you
to check your comprehension as you read (answers are located in
Appendix B
).
■
 The format for exercise and review answers guides you in the
development of your coding ability by including three response
variations:
 
■
 
Quick Checks
 are located throughout the chapters, providing short
follow-up questions after a key concept has been covered to
immediately assess learning (answers are located in 
Appendix C
).
■
 A full-color design brings a fresh look to the material, visually
reinforcing new concepts and examples.
■
 Medical procedures or conditions are illustrated and discussed in
the text to help you understand the services being coded.
 
■
 Concrete “real-life” examples illustrate the application of important
coding principles and practices.
 
■
 
ICD-10-CM Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
 boxes contain
excerpts of the actual guidelines, presenting the official wording
alongside in-text discussions.
■
 
From the Trenches
 boxes highlight a different real-life medical coding
practitioner in each chapter, with photographs throughout the
chapter alongside quotes that offer practical advice or motivational
comments.
■
 
Coding Shots
 contain tips for the new coder.
■
 
CMS RULES
 boxes highlight correct coding methods as required for
Medicare claims.
 
■
 
Toolbox
 features are located throughout the chapters, providing
scenarios and questions to help apply chapter content to realistic
scenarios (answers are located in 
Appendix D
).
 
■
 
Stop
 notes halt you for a reality check, offering a brief summary of
material that was just covered and providing a transition into the
next topic.
 
■
 
Caution!
 notes warn you about common coding mistakes and
reinforce the concept of coding as an exact science.
■
 
Check This Out!
 boxes offer notes about accessing reference
information related to coding, primarily via the Internet.
 
■
 A 
Coder’s Index
 is located in the back of the book, providing easy
reference when looking for specific codes.
 

Extensive supplemental resources
Considering the broad range of students, programs, and institutions
in which this textbook is used, we have developed an extensive
package of supplements designed to complement 
Step-by-Step Medical
Coding
. Each of these comprehensive supplements has been developed
with the needs of both students and instructors in mind.
Student workbook
The fully updated workbook supplements the text with more than
1250 questions and terminology exercises, including 100 original
source documents to familiarize the user with documents he or she
will encounter in practice. (Odd-numbered answers are located in
Appendix B
, and the full answer key is available only in the TEACH
Instructor Resources on Evolve.) Reports are included in a variety of
areas, including arthroscopy, muscle repair, thoracentesis, tubal
ligation, and endarterectomy. The workbook questions also follow the
same answer format of the main text, improving coding skills and
promoting critical thinking.
 
TEACH instructor resources on evolve
No matter what your level of teaching experience, this total-teaching
solution will help you plan your lessons with ease, and the author has
developed all the curriculum materials necessary to use 
Step-by-Step
Medical Coding
 in the classroom. Instructors can access:
 

■
 Extensive testing resources that include two distinct sets of exams:
1. 
Ready-Made Tests
 (on Evolve or within the
Evolve LMS) are split into Theory and
Practical tests that correlate to each chapter of
the text.
2. 
Test Banks
 (within the Evolve LMS or
through ExamView) include a wide variety of
multiple choice, true/false, matching, and
completion questions that correlate to each
chapter of the text.
■
 The ExamView test generator will help you quickly and easily
prepare quizzes and exams, and the test banks can be customized to
your specific teaching methods.
■
 
Instructor-led assessment applications
 are available to students on
Evolve. See Evolve learning resources on the next page for more
details.
■
 
Answer Keys
 for Chapter Reviews, all Workbook questions, Ready-
Made Tests, Online Activities, and TruCode® Practice Exercises
■
 Curriculum guides and TEACH lesson plans. With TEACH (Total
Education and Curriculum Help), every textbook chapter is divided
into 50-minute lessons designed to promote active student learning
and involvement in classroom discussions and activities.
■
 Course calendar and syllabus.
■
 Comprehensive PowerPoint collection that can be easily customized
to support your lectures, formatted with PowerPoint as overhead
transparencies, or formatted as handouts for student note-taking.
Interactive PowerPoint slides also available.
■
 Instructor Content Updates.
Evolve learning resources
The Evolve Learning Resources offer helpful material that will extend
your studies beyond the classroom.
Three instructor-led applications 
are available to students on Evolve (answers are only provided at the
discretion of the instructor):
Student online activities 
The online activities supplement the text with 47 chapter activities and
25 coding cases. The variety of activity styles include multiple choice,
fill in the blank, matching, and coding exercises. These activities will
reinforce material learned in the text and offer students another study
tool. Answers are only available in the TEACH Instructor Resources
on Evolve.
Chapter reviews 
For those who prefer electronic assessment, this application offers an
alternative way to assign Parts I and II of the textbook Chapters
Reviews. Answers are only available in the TEACH Instructor
Resources on Evolve.
30-day access to trucode® encoder essentials 
NOTE: It is recommended that you only activate your TruCode®
Encoder Essentials access after you have completed all of the text
exercises using your print coding manuals.
As an additional bonus feature, we have
included 30-day access to TruCode® Encoder Essentials. Directions
and an access code can be found on the inside front cover of this text.
■
 Click the 
TruCode® 30 day access upon clicking
 asset within your
Evolve Resources.
■
 Next click 
TruCode® Encoder Essentials
.
■
 Peel the sticker at the bottom right of the front inside cover to reveal
an access code, then enter the access code when prompted on
screen. 
Your access code will only be valid during the current
coding year, and once entered your access will be limited to 30
days.
■
 Once access is granted, refer to your 
TruCode® Practice Exercises
asset on Evolve for further instruction.
■
 Click the 
TruCode® Instructions and Practice Exercises
 asset on Evolve
for additional instructions and practice using 
TruCode®
.
Coding tips and links
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting,
 content updates, and
coding links help you stay current with this ever-changing field.
Course management system
A Course Management System is also available free to instructors who
adopt this textbook. This web-based platform gives instructors yet
another resource to facilitate learning and to make medical coding
content accessible to students. In addition to the Evolve Learning
Resources available to both faculty and students, there is an entire
suite of tools available that allows for communication between
instructors and students.
Refer to the front inside cover of this text for registration
instructions to access these comprehensive online resources.
Step-by-step medical coding online
Designed to accommodate diverse learning styles and environments,
Step-by-Step Medical Coding Online
 is an online course supplement that
works in conjunction with the textbook to provide you with a wide
range of visual, auditory, and interactive learning materials. The
course amplifies course content, synthesizes concepts, reinforces
learning, and demonstrates practical applications in a dynamic and
exciting way. As you move through the course, interactive exercises,
quizzes, and activities allow you to check your comprehension and
learn from immediate feedback while still allowing you to use your
textbook as a resource. Because of its design, this course offers
students a unique and innovative learning experience.
 

Development of this edition
This book would not have been possible without a team of educators
and professionals, including practicing coders and technical
consultants. The combined efforts of the team members have made
this text an incredible learning tool.
Query manager
Patricia Cordy Henricksen MS, CHCA, CPC-I, CPC, CCP-P, ACS-
PM
     
AAPC-Approved ICD-10-CM Trainer, Auditing, Coding, and
Education Specialist, Soterion Medical Services/Merrick Management,
Lexington, Kentucky
Senior collaborator and ICD-10-CM
consultant
Nancy Maguire ACS, CRT, PCS, FCS, HCS-D, APC, AFC
     
Physician Consultant for Auditing and Education, Palm Bay,
Florida
ICD-10-CM consultant
Kathy Buchda CPC, CPMA
     
Revenue Recognition, Forest City, Iowa
Editorial review board
To ensure the accuracy of the material presented in this textbook,
many reviewers have provided feedback over several editions of this
text. We are deeply grateful to the numerous people who have shared
their suggestions and comments. Reviewing a book or supplement
takes an incredible amount of energy and attention, and we are glad
so many colleagues were able to take the time to give us their
feedback on the material. It takes a village of coders to keep this work
relevant. If you have input, suggestions, or criticisms regarding this
material, or if you are interested in reviewing this book, please contact
us at 
BuckStep@elsevier.com
. Any updates, including corrections, will
be posted to the Evolve site and included in the next edition.
Deborah Bebow CPC
     
Instructor of Health Information Technology, Kirtland Community
College, Roscommon, Michigan
Charlene A. Crump CPC, AHI, CMAS, CPN
     
Financial Counselor, Cleveland, Ohio
Robert H. Ekvall PhD, CCS, COC, CPC
     
HIM Coder/Biller II, Scripps MD Anderson Cancer Center, La Jolla,
California
Mona F. Falcon CPC, CMBS, CMAA, CCA, CCMA
     
Academic Advisor, Laguna Hills, California
Suzan Hauptman MPM, CPC, CEMC, CEDC
     
Senior Principal, Ace Med Group, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Aimée Michaelis MEd, CPC
     
Lead Instructor, Pima Medical Institute, Denver, Colorado
Robin M. Moore CPC
     
Director, Medical Assistant/Medical Coding Programs, Davis
College, Toledo, Ohio, Coder, Ohio Himagine Solutions, Perrysburg,
Ohio
Sharon Oliver CPC, CPMA, CPC-I
     
Owner, Medical Coding and Consultants, Johnson City, Tennessee
Letitia Patterson MPA, CPC, CPMA, CPC-I, CCS-P
     
President, A Coder’s Resource, Chicago, Illinois
Lisa Riggs CPC, CPC-I
     
Instructional Support Specialist, Ultimate Medical Academy,
Tampa, Florida
Rolando Russell MBA, RHIA, CPC, CPAR
     
Program Director, Ultimate Medical Academy, Tampa, Florida
Katherine Sa CPC, CRC, CMBS, CCMA
     
Medical Coding Instructor, Laguna Hills, CA
Kathleen M. Skolnick COC, CPC, CPB, CPCO, CPMA, CPPM, CPC-
I, CEMC, CRC
     
Certified ICD-10-CM Instructor, Medical Coding for Professionals,
LLC, Linden, New Jersey
Jennifer J. Talbot MS.Ed., RHIA, CCS-P
     
AHIMA Approved ICD-10-CM/PCS Trainer, HIT Program
Director/Instructor, Kirtland Community College, Roscommon,
Michigan
Mary Lynn Taylor MA-HIM, CPC, CPC-I, CMA
     
CEO, Professional Coding Services, Fairbanks, Alaska
Introduction
The number of people seeking health care services has increased as a
result of an aging population, technologic advances, and better access
to health care. At the same time, there is an increase in the use of
outpatient facilities. This increase is due in part to the government’s
tighter controls over patient services. The government continues to
increase its involvement in and control over health care through
reimbursement of services for Medicare and Medicaid patients. Other
insurance companies are following the government’s lead and
adopting reimbursement systems that have proved effective in
reducing third-party payer costs but place further pressure on the
health care system.
Health care in America has undergone tremendous change in the
recent past, and more changes are promised for the future. These
changes have resulted in an ever-increasing demand for qualified
medical coders. The Bureau of Labor Statistics states that employment
of medical records and health information technicians “is projected to
grow 15 percent from 2014 to 2024, much faster than the average for
all occupations. The demand for health services is expected to increase
as the population ages.”
1
There is also an increase in the number of medical tests, treatments,
and procedures, as well as an increase in claims review by third-party
payers. Credentialed coders are on average paid more than the non-
credentialed coder. According to the 2015 AAPC Salary Survey (which
was the latest available upon publication of this text) the overall
average salary for an AAPC certified coder is $51,659 (compared to
$39,811 for a non-credentialed coder)!
2
 
Figure 1
 illustrates the earnings
by region; 
Figure 2
 shows salary by job responsibility; and 
Figure 3
charts salary by workplace. COC™ (formerly CPC-H®), the hospital
outpatient certification, pays more on average ($58,822) than CPC®,
the physician outpatient certification ($51,454)
2
. Coders working in a
solo practice and small group practices on average earn on the lower
end at $45,722, while coders working in health systems earn on the
higher end at $51,389.
3
 Further information can be obtained about the
AAPC and the certifications offered by the organization at
www.aapc.com
.
 Be sure to check your free
Evolve student resources for updated salary figures. Go to the 
Course
Content
 section, click 
Resources,
 then click 
Content Updates – Student.
From the Trenches
 
“Coding can really open doors to a variety of things. You’re not tied
into one job—there are many roads you can take and many things
you can do with a coding background.”
MARIA
FIGURE 1
 Salary by Region.
(From Dick MA, Alanis P: 2015 Salary Survey:
Credentials Tip the Scale, 
AAPC
 (website): 
https://www.aapc.com/blog/33226-2015-
salary-survey-credentials-tip-the-scale/
. Accessed August 25, 2016.)
 
FIGURE 2
 Salary by Job Responsibility.
(From Dick MA, Alanis P: 2015
Salary Survey: Credentials Tip the Scale, 
AAPC
 (website):
https://www.aapc.com/blog/33226-2015-salary-survey-credentials-tip-the-scale/
.
Accessed August 25, 2016.)
 
FIGURE 3
 Salary by Workplace.
(Modified from Dick MA, Alanis P: 2015 Salary
Survey: Credentials Tip the Scale, 
AAPC
 (website): 
https://www.aapc.com/blog/33226-
2015-salary-survey-credentials-tip-the-scale/
. Accessed August 25, 2016.)
 Be sure to check your free
Evolve student resources for updated salary figures. Go to the 
Course
Documents
 section, click 
Resources,
 then click 
Content Updates – Student.
From the Trenches
 
“You need to be committed.
 
.
 
.
 
. Be prepared to spend some time and
effort to study and work hard. Do whatever you have to do to get
your foot in the door.”
BARBARA
Medical coding is far more than assigning numbers to services and
diagnoses. Coders abstract information from the patient record and
combine that information with their knowledge of reimbursement and
coding guidelines to optimize physician payment. Coders have been
called the “fraud squad” because they optimize but never maximize
and code only for services provided to the patient that are
documented in the medical record.
According to AAPC᾽s 2015 Salary Survey “Data shows our
credentialed members are staying ahead of average inflation and
unemployment rates in the United States.”
3
 There is a demand for
skilled coders, and you can be one of those in demand. Put your best
efforts into building the foundation of your career, and you will be
rewarded for a lifetime.
References
1. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Employment
Projections.
www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/medical-records-
and-health-information-technicians.htm
2. McKinley A: Infographic: 2015 Healthcare Business Salary
Survey, 
AAPC
 (website): 
https://www.aapc.com/blog/33821-
infographic-2015-salary-survey/
 Accessed September 28, 2016.
3. Dick MA Alanis P: 2015 Salary Survey: Credentials Tip the
Scale, 
AAPC
 (website): 
https://www.aapc.com/blog/33226-
2015-salary-survey-credentials-tip-the-scale/
2015 Accessed
August 25, 2016
UNIT 1
Reimbursement
OUTLINE
1.  Reimbursement, HIPAA, and compliance
CHAPTER 1
Reimbursement, HIPAA, and
compliance
 
“You will probably feel a bit ‘lost’ in the beginning, but don’t let that
slow you down! You are learning to identify the little pieces to a big
puzzle. Wait until the puzzle is completed before deciding if you like
the ‘big picture’; you will be greatly rewarded.”
Beverly Comsa, CPC
 
HealthCare Training Manager 
New Horizons Learning Center 
Anaheim, California
CHAPTER TOPICS
Introduction
Basic Structure of the Medicare Program
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
Federal Register
Outpatient Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS)
Medicare Fraud
Managed Health Care
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Distinguish among Medicare Parts A, B, C, and D.
2 
Interpret rules of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA).
3 
Locate information in the 
Federal Register
.
4 
Explain the RBRVS system.
5 
Understand the framework of Medicare Fraud programs.
6 
Identify the major components of Managed Health Care.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Introduction
Coding systems are used in the outpatient and inpatient health care
settings. Each of the coding systems plays a role in the reimbursement
of patient health care services. As a medical coder, it is your
responsibility to ensure that you code accurately and completely to
optimize reimbursement for services provided. To accomplish this,
you not only need to know the coding systems but also the
environment in which the modern medical office functions.
Medical advances allow people to live longer and healthier lives
than ever before. In 2014, the Administration on Aging (AOA) of the
Department of Health and Human Services published a population
survey that indicated “The population age 65 years or older numbered
44.7 million in 2013... They represented 14.1% of the U.S. population,
about one in every seven Americans. The number of older Americans
increased by 8.8 million or 24.7% since 2003, compared to an increase
of 6.8% for the under-65 population. Between 2003 and 2013, the
number of Americans aged 45–64 (who will reach age 65 over the next
two decades) increased by 20.7% and the number of Americans age 60
and over increased by 30.7% from 48.1 million to 62.8 million.”
1
 The
elderly compose the fastest growing segment of our population, and
this growth will place additional demands on health care providers
and facilities.
The Administration for Community Living (ACL) reports in its
Fiscal Year 2017 
Justification of Estimates for Appropriations Committees,
“The U.S. population over age 60 is projected to increase by 20 percent
between 2014 and 2020, from 64.8 million to 77.6 million... The
number of seniors age 65 and older with severe disabilities – defined
as 3 or more limitations in activities of daily living – that are at
greatest risk of nursing home admission, is projected to increase by
more than 20 percent by the year 2020.”
2
According to the National Health Expenditure (NHE) Projections
2014-2024 report, “For 2014–2024, health spending is projected to
grow at an average rate of 5.8 percent per year (4.9 percent on a per
capita basis). Health spending is projected to grow 1.1 percent faster
than Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per year over this period; as a
result, the health share of GDP is expected to rise from 17.4 percent in
2013 to 19.6 percent by 2024.”
3
 The number of persons enrolled in
government health programs will increase as the enrollment in private
health programs will decrease as the aging population enrolls in
Medicare and as the government expands its ever increasing control
over the national health care sector.
Increasing numbers of elderly people, technologic advances, and
improved access to health care have increased consumer use of health
care services. As more people utilize health care services, coding
becomes even more important to appropriate reimbursement and cost
control.
As a coder, it is your responsibility to ensure that the data reported
are as accurate as possible, not only for classification and study
purposes but also to obtain appropriate reimbursement. Ethical issues
will arise and will require attention by coding personnel. Guidelines
must always be followed in the assignment of codes. Instruction from
internal and external sources (e.g., administration, review
organizations, third-party payers) that may increase reimbursement
but conflict with coding guidelines must be discussed and resolved.
Reimbursement usually comes from third-party payers. By far, the
largest third-party payer is the government through the Medicare
program. Because the Medicare program plays such an important role
in reimbursement, the rules and regulations that govern Medicare
reimbursement will be the first topic of study.
Basic structure of the medicare
program
The Medicare program was established in 1965 with the passage of the
Social Security Act. The Medicare program dramatically increased the
involvement of the government in health care and consists of 
Part A
(Hospital Insurance) and 
Part B
 (Supplemental Medical Insurance).
Part A pays for the cost of hospital/facility care, and Part B pays for
physician services and durable medical equipment not paid for under
Part A. Part A insurance also helps to cover hospice care and some
care services that are rendered in the home.
Medicare was originally designed for people 65 and over. In 1972
people who were eligible for disability benefits from Social Security
were also covered under the Medicare program, along with those
patients experiencing end-stage renal disease. Individuals covered
under Medicare are termed 
beneficiaries
.
The Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) is responsible for the administration of the Federal Medicare
program. Within the Department, the operation of Medicare is
delegated to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS),
formerly the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA). The
funds to run Medicare are generated from payroll taxes paid by
employers and employees. The Social Security Administration is
responsible for collecting and handling the funds. CMS’s function is to
promote the general welfare of the public, and its stated mission and
vision are:
CMS’s mission is to serve Medicare & Medicaid beneficiaries.
The CMS vision is to become the most energized, efficient,
customer friendly Agency in the government. CMS will strengthen
the health care services & information available to Medicare &
Medicaid beneficiaries & the health care providers who serve them.
 
4
CMS handles the daily operation of the Medicare program through
the use of Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) (formerly
Fiscal Intermediaries, FIs). The MACs do the paperwork for Medicare
and are usually insurance companies that bid for a contract with CMS
to handle the Medicare program in a specific area. The monies for
Medicare flow from the Social Security Administration through the
CMS to the MACs and, finally, are paid to beneficiaries and providers.
Originally, CMS proposed 15 Part A and B MACs (
Fig. 1-1
) and 4
Durable Medical Equipment (DME) MACs (
Fig. 1-2
). CMS now
believes that the efficiency and effectiveness of its contracted Medicare
claims operations can be further increased by consolidating some of
the smaller A/B MAC workloads to form larger A/B MAC
jurisdictions, further reducing the size range among the A/B MACs.
CMS believes that reducing the number of A/B MAC contracts to ten
will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of CMS’s internal MAC
procurement 
and contract administration process. The jurisdictions
will have their names changed from numbers ( Jurisdiction 1) to
letters ( Jurisdiction E) as shown in 
Fig. 1-1
.
5
FIGURE 1–1
Part A and B MAC Jurisdictions.
FIGURE 1–2
Durable Medical Equipment (DME) Jurisdictions.
As of March 2014, three of the planned consolidations had been
completed, with the final two delayed up to one additional MAC
procurement cycle (five years) in order for CMS to evaluate the
current trends in Medicare Contracting reform. When complete, CMS
will have consolidated the A/B MAC workloads to form five
consolidated A/B MAC contracts.
6
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdictions 2 and 3 
have already been combined to
form A/B MAC Jurisdiction F
 (Alaska, Washington, Oregon, Idaho,
North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and
Arizona)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdictions 4 and 7 
have already been combined to
form A/B MAC Jurisdiction H
 (Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi,
Texas, Oklahoma, Colorado, and New Mexico)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdictions 5 and 6 will be combined to form A/B MAC
Jurisdiction G (Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Kansas, Nebraska,
Iowa, and Missouri)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdictions 8 and 15 will be combined to form A/B MAC
Jurisdiction I (Kentucky, Ohio, Michigan, and Indiana)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdictions 13 and 14 
have already been combined to
form A/B MAC Jurisdiction K
 (New York, Connecticut,
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Vermont, Maine, and New
Hampshire)
5
, 
 
7
CMS intends to re-compete five A/B MAC contracts/jurisdictions
based on their present area boundaries, which will not be increased or
reduced in size by CMS’s consolidation strategy.
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdiction E (California, Hawaii, Nevada, Pacific
Islands)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdiction N (Florida, Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdiction J (Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdiction M (North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia,
West Virginia)
■
 
A/B MAC Jurisdiction L (Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New
Jersey, Washington DC)
5
, 
 
7
 For more information about
MACs, visit: 
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-
Contracting/Medicare-Administrative-Contractors/Who-are-the-
MACs.html
Physicians, hospitals, and other suppliers that furnish care or
supplies to Medicare patients are called 
providers
. Providers must be
licensed by local and state health agencies to be eligible to provide
services or supplies to Medicare patients. Providers must also meet
various additional Medicare requirements before being eligible for
payments.
Medicare pays for 80% of allowable charges, and the beneficiary
pays the remaining 20% for office visits to a health care provider. The
beneficiary pays deductibles, premiums, and coinsurance payments.
(The 2016 deductible for Part A is $1288 per hospital stay of 1-60 days
and for Part B, $166.)
8
 The 
coinsurance
 is the 20% that Medicare does
not pay. Often, beneficiaries have additional insurance to cover out-of-
pocket expenses or noncovered services.
Beneficiary Pays:
Deductible, premiums, coinsurance (20%), 100% of noncovered services
Medicare Pays:
Covered services (80%)
As of January 2011, the Affordable Care Act waived the Part B
deductible and the 20 percent coinsurance for a grade A (strongly
recommended) or grade B (recommended) preventative services or
the annual wellness examination.
The maximum out-of-pocket amounts are set each year according to
formulas established by Congress and published in the 
Federal
Register
. New amounts usually take effect each January 1.
Quality improvement organizations (QIOs)
Claims sent in by the providers of services are processed by MACs
according to Medicare guidelines. QIOs providers were previously
termed PROs (Peer Review Organizations). Under the direction of
CMS, the Quality Improvement Organizations program consists of a
national network of QIOs, responsible for each state, territory, and the
District of Columbia. QIOs work with consumers and physicians,
hospitals, and other caregivers to refine care delivery systems to make
sure patients get the right care at the right time, particularly patients
from underserved populations. Providers can sign a Quality
Improvement Organizations (QIOs) agreement with a MAC to accept
assignment on all claims submitted to Medicare. When a provider
accepts assignment, the provider agrees to accept the Medicare
allowable for services provided. The provider also agrees not to bill
the patient for the difference between what the service costs and what
Medicare allows. For example, a QIO provider renders a service that
costs $100 and bills Medicare for the service; Medicare allows $58, and
the provider accepts the Medicare payment as payment in full. Now,
you are probably asking yourself why anyone would agree to this.
The patient does not pay the $42 difference, nor does Medicare. The
amount is written off by the provider as if the service really cost only
$58. This is a good deal for Medicare and the patient, but what about
the provider? Why would a provider agree to decreased payments?
Incentives have been established to encourage providers to become
QIO providers. Congress has mandated the following incentives:
For QIO providers:
■
 
Direct payment is made to the provider on all claims.
■
 
A 5% higher fee schedule than that for non-QIO providers.
■
 
Faster processing of claims.
■
 
The provider’s name is listed in the QIO directory, which is made
available to each Medicare patient, along with identification as a
QIO provider who accepts assignment on all claims.
■
 
Hospital referrals for outpatient care must provide the patient with
the name and address of at least one QIO provider.
For non-QIO providers:
■
 
Payment goes to the patient on all claims.
■
 
A 5% lower fee schedule than that for QIO providers.
■
 
Slower processing of claims is the norm.
■
 
A statement on the Medicare Summary Notice (MSN) sent to the
patient reminds the patient that the use of a participating physician
will lower out-of-pocket expenses.
For QIO:
■
 
A bonus is offered for each recruited and enrolled QIO provider.
There are incentives for providers to participate in the Medicare
program! These incentives are backed by Congress. Currently, more
than half of all physicians in the nation are participating providers.
Part A: Hospital insurance
Hospitals report Part A services by using diagnosis codes and
procedure codes that together determine Medical Severity-Diagnosis
Related Groups (MS-DRG) assignment. You will be learning more
about MS-DRGs in 
Chapter 27
 of this text.
Beneficiaries are automatically eligible for Part A, hospital
insurance, when they are eligible for Medicare benefits.
During a hospital inpatient stay, Part A pays for a semiprivate room
(two to four beds), meals and special diet, plus all other medically
necessary services except personal-convenience items and private-
duty nurses. Also covered are general nursing, drugs as part of the
inpatient treatment, and other hospital services and supplies. Part A
can also help pay for inpatient care in a Medicare-certified skilled
nursing facility if the patient’s condition requires daily skilled nursing
or rehabilitation services that can be provided only in a skilled
nursing facility. Skilled nursing care means care that can be performed
only by or under the supervision of licensed nursing personnel.
Skilled rehabilitation services may include such services as physical
therapy performed by or under the supervision of a professional
therapist. The skilled nursing care and skilled rehabilitation services
received must be based on a physician’s orders. Part A pays for a
semiprivate room in the skilled nursing facility, plus meals, nursing
services, and drugs.
Part A can pay for covered home health care visits from a
participating home health agency. The visits can include part-time
skilled nursing care and physical therapy or speech therapy when the
services are approved by a physician.
Hospice provides relief (palliative) care and support care to
terminally ill patients. Part A also pays for hospice care for terminally
ill patients when a physician has certified that the patient is terminally
ill and is expected to live 6 months or less if the disease runs its
normal course. Further, the patient has elected to receive care from a
hospice rather than the standard Medicare benefits, and the hospice is
Medicare-certified. Items covered include nursing services, physician
services, services of a home health care aide, homemaker services,
medical supplies, counseling, and any other item or service which is
specified in the plan and for which payment may otherwise be made
under this title.
9
Part B: Supplementary insurance
Part B is not automatically provided to beneficiaries when they
become eligible for Medicare. Instead, beneficiaries must purchase the
benefits with a monthly premium. Part B helps pay for medically
necessary professional services, outpatient hospital services, home
health care, and a number of other medical services and supplies that
are not covered by Part A. Beneficiaries pay a premium each month.
There are circumstances in which the premium may vary. If Medicare
recipients do not sign up for Medicare when they become eligible,
they will be penalized. The cost of enrolling in Medicare will increase
by 10% each year that they could have obtained coverage, unless they
qualify under a special case. The penalty will be in effect as long as
they retain coverage. These Part B services are reported using
diagnosis codes, CPT codes for the procedure (service), and HCPCS
codes (National Level II codes) for the additional supplies and
services.
Part C: Medicare advantage organizations
Medicare Part C is also known as Medicare Advantage Organizations
(formerly Medicare + Choice) and is a set of health care options from
which Medicare beneficiaries can choose their health care providers.
The options available under Part C are:
■
 
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO)
■
 
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO)
■
 
Private Fee-for-Service Plan (PFFS)
■
 
Special Needs Plan (SNP)
■
 
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
■
 
HMO Point of Service (HMOPOS)
Medicare Advantage Plans may offer the option to purchase
additional benefits, such as vision, hearing, dental, and/or health and
wellness programs, and prescription drug coverage that the original
Medicare does not offer. The managed plan, such as an HMO, has a
contract to deliver Medicare services under the plan and provides the
same services to all beneficiaries enrolled under Part C. The
beneficiary is still under the coverage of Medicare but has opted to
utilize a different way of receiving services.
Part D: Prescription drugs
The Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization
Act of 2003 (MMA) (Pub. L. 108–173, enacted December 8, 2003)
established a prescription drug benefit under Part D of the Medicare
program. On January 1, 2006, Medicare beneficiaries could enroll in
the Medicare prescription drug plan (Part D) and choose between
several plans that offered drug coverage. Medicare beneficiaries are
charged a premium each month to be a member of these plans and
receive the Medicare Part D drug benefit, pay a deductible, and a
copayment.
 
QUICK CHECK 1-1
Match the Medicare part(s) with the correct phrase(s) below.
1. 
Automatic coverage under Social Security _____
2. 
Optional coverage under Social Security _____
3. 
Hospice care coverage _____
4. 
Prescription drug coverage _____
5. 
Physician visit coverage _____
6. 
Beneficiary pays premium for coverage _____
7. 
Codes assigned for payment using diagnoses; CPT; and HCPCS
_____
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 1-1
Medicare
Using the information presented in this chapter, complete the
following:
1 
The major third-party payer in the United States is the
_____________.
2 
The Medicare program was established in what year? _____________
3 
Hospital Insurance is Medicare Part _____________.
4 
Supplemental Medical Insurance is Medicare Part _____________.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 The CMS website is located
at 
www.cms.gov
 and contains information about the Medicare
program. Through it, you can link to useful information concerning
Medicare providers.
Health insurance portability and
accountability act
HIPAA stands for the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996 (also known as the Kennedy-Kassebaum Law) and
includes provisions for governing:
■
 
Health coverage portability
■
 
Health information privacy
■
 
Administrative simplification
■
 
Medical savings accounts
■
 
Long-term care insurance
The section of the Act that has resulted in the most major change to
the health care industry is the administrative simplification portion of
which there are four parts:
■
 
Electronic transactions and code sets standard requirements
■
 
Privacy requirements
■
 
Security requirements
■
 
National identifier requirements
Electronic transactions
Uniformity is one goal of the change that took place by adopting
transaction standards for several types of electronic health
information transactions. Third-party payers (insurers) could no
longer have unique requirements for processing claims. Providers and
payers covered by HIPAA are required to provide the same
information using standard formats for processing claims and
payments, as well as for the maintenance and transmission of
electronic health care information and data. With HIPAA there is now
only one way to process electronic claims.
Transactions
 are activities involving the transfer of health care
information. 
Transmission
 is the movement of electronic data
between two entities and the technology that supports the transfer.
For example, if you send claims electronically to a payer, you utilize
Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI)
 technology. The Secretary of Health
and Human Services has adopted eight standards for electronic
transactions:
1. 
Health Care Claims or Equivalent Encounter Information
2. 
Eligibility for a Health Plan
3. 
Referral Certification and Authorization
4. 
Health Care Claim Status
5. 
Enrollment and Disenrollment in a Health Plan
6. 
Health Care Payment and Remittance Advice
7. 
Health Plan Premium Payments
8. 
Coordination of Benefits
10
Providers must complete a Standard Electronic Data Interchange
(EDI) Enrollment Form before submitting electronic media claims
(EMC) or other EDI transactions. The software that supports the
electronic transmissions must be compatible with the HIPAA
transaction standard 
Version 5010
 and the National Council for
Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) version 
D.0.
 
CODING SHOT
Years ago, each payer had different requirements for codes and forms
in medical insurance billing. The federal government determined that
in addition to providing an employee the opportunity to continue
coverage during a job change or loss, and limiting coverage exclusion
for pre-existing conditions, health care would benefit if every payer
and provider used the same standardized forms and codes, and if
everyone stored and transmitted medical insurance data
electronically. But electronic information has the potential for
unauthorized access, so legislation was needed to protect the public
while at the same time streamlining medical reporting. HIPAA was
created to govern health care portability, privacy of information,
simplification of reporting by standardizing code sets, billing forms,
and rules. Over 99 percent of Medicare Part A claims and over 96
percent of Medicare Part B claims transactions are received
electronically.
 
11
Code sets
Code sets are composed of numbers and/or letters that identify
specific diagnosis and clinical procedures on claims and encounter
forms. The CPT, ICD-10-CM, and ICD-10-PCS codes are examples of
code sets for procedure and diagnosis coding. Other 
code sets
adopted under the administrative simplification provisions of HIPAA
include those for claims involving:
Groups
Code Sets
1. 
Physician services/other health services
HCPCS and CPT
2. 
Medical supplies, orthotics, and DME (durable medical equipment)
HCPCS (A-V codes)
3. 
Diagnosis codes
ICD-10-CM
4. 
Inpatient hospital procedures
ICD-10-PCS
5. 
Dental services
Dental codes (HCPCS, D codes)
6. 
Drugs/biologics
National Drug Classifications (NDC)
 
From the Trenches
“Don’t be afraid to write in your coding books! As you study and read,
highlight important rules. Write instructions ‘in your own words’ so you
will understand when you go back to look at it again.”
BEVERLY
Privacy requirements
HIPAA also has privacy requirements that govern disclosure of
patient protected health information (PHI) placed in the medical
record by physicians, nurses, and other health care providers. This
includes conversations with nurses and other staff about the patient’s
health care or treatment. All PHI is included in the privacy
requirements.
Security requirements
There are security regulations that address the administrative,
technical, and physical safeguards required to prevent unauthorized
access to protected health care information. There are significant
penalties for those who breach the security of the medical record or
PHI. Do not access any medical documentation that you are not
authorized to access. You are only to access information that you have
a work-related reason to access.
Facilities must train their employees in their privacy procedures
and designate an individual to be responsible for ensuring the
procedures are followed. If an employee fails to follow the established
procedures, the facility is required by law to take appropriate
disciplinary action.
Security has become a significant concern since computers are being
used to store patient information. The two major terms used to
describe the format of the electronic health record are:
■
 
Electronic medical record 
(EMR)
—a computerized health record
limited to one practice
■
 
Electronic health record 
(EHR)
—the entire health record compiled
from multiple sources
National provider identification
HIPAA also requires health care providers, health plans, and
employers to have National Provider Identification (NPI) numbers
that are unique identification on transactions. The NPI is entered onto
the claim forms to identify the provider(s) of the services.
Further information about HIPAA is located on the CMS website:
www.cms.gov/HIPAAGenInfo
.
Federal register
The 
Federal Register
 is the official publication for all “Presidential
Documents,” “Rules and Regulations,” “Proposed Rules,” and
“Notices.” When the government institutes national changes, those
changes are published in the 
Federal Register
. You must be aware of
the changes listed in the 
Federal Register
 that relate to reimbursement
of Medicare so as to submit Medicare charges correctly.
Most of the information in this chapter is about rules that the
government developed and introduced through the 
Federal Register
.
You might wonder why so much time is to be spent on learning how
to follow the guidelines set by the government for reimbursement
when it is only one third-party payer. The answer is simple: Because
the government is the largest third-party payer in the nation and even
a slight change in the rules governing reimbursement to providers can
have major consequences. For example, there was a 45% decrease in
the number of inpatient hospital beds between 1975 and 1996,
12
directly related to a government-implemented inpatient
reimbursement system that you will learn about in 
Chapter 27
, the
MS-DRGs. Often, more than half of the patients in a hospital are
Medicare patients. Because the government is such an important
payer in the health care system, you must know how to interpret the
government’s directives published in the 
Federal Register
. In addition,
most commercial insurers have adopted Medicare payment
philosophies for their own reimbursement policies. The government
has changed health care reimbursement through the Medicare
program, and even more changes are promised for the future.
If you have the 
Federal Register
 available to you through a library or
via the Internet, locating and reviewing some of the issues would be
an excellent educational activity for you.
 You can access the 
Federal
Register
 at 
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
, the Federal Digital System.
The October editions of the 
Federal Register
 are of special interest to
hospital
 facilities because the hospital updates are released in that
edition. 
Outpatient
 facilities are especially interested in the November
or December edition of the 
Federal Register
 because Medicare
reimbursements for outpatient services are usually published in one
of those editions. Each year, when changes to the various payment
systems are proposed, those proposed changes are published early in
the year, and a period of several months is offered to interested parties
to comment and make suggestions on the proposed changes. The final
rules are usually published in the fall editions and implemented in the
following calendar year. Some addendums are particularly helpful to
the coder because they list the active codes, noncovered codes,
bundled codes, etc.
Fig. 1-3
 shows a copy of a portion of the 
Federal Register;
 it is marked
to indicate the location of the following details
13
:
1. 
The regulation’s issuing office
2. 
The subject of the notice
3. 
The agency
4. 
The action
5. 
A summary
6. 
The dates
7. 
Contacts for further information
8. 
Supplementary information
FIGURE 1–3
Example of page from 
Federal Register
.
Items 1 through 8 are always placed before the Final Rule, which is
the official statement of the entire rule.
EXERCISE 1-2
Federal Register
Answer the following questions:
1 
Which edition of the 
Federal Register
 is of special interest to hospital
facilities? _____________________________________
2 
Which edition of the 
Federal Register
 is of special interest to
outpatient facilities? ___________________________________
Using
 
Fig. 1-3
, answer the following questions:
3 
What is the issuing office?
___________________________________________________________________________
4 
Comments are due by what date?
_______________________________________________________________
5 
What is the Action?
_________________________________________________________________________
6 
According to the “For Further Information Contact” section in 
Fig. 1-
3
, who is the person you would contact for further information
related to the issue addressed in this 
Federal Register
?
_____________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Outpatient resource-based relative
value scale (RBRVS)
Physician payment reform was implemented to:
1. 
Decrease Medicare expenditures
2. 
Redistribute physicians’ payments more equitably
3. 
Ensure quality health care at a reasonable rate
Before January 1, 1992, payment under Medicare Part B for
physicians’ services was based on a reasonable charge that, under the
Social Security Act, could not exceed the lowest of (1) the physician’s
actual charge for the service, (2) the physician’s customary charge for
the service, or (3) the prevailing charges of physicians for similar
services in the locality.
The act also required that the local prevailing charge for a
physician’s service not exceed the level in effect for that service in the
locality for the fiscal year ending on June 30, 1973. Some provision
was made for changes in the level on the basis of economic changes.
When there were economic changes in the country, the Medicare
Economic Index (MEI) reflected these changes. Until 1992, the MEI
tied increases in the Medicare prevailing charges to increases in the
costs of physicians’ practice and general wage rates throughout the
economy as compared with the index base year. The MEI was first
published in the 
Federal Register
 on June 16, 1975, and has been
recalculated annually since then.
Congress mandated the MEI as part of the 1972 Amendment to the
Social Security Act. The 1972 Amendment to the Act did not specify
the particular type of index to be used; however, the present form of
the MEI follows the recommendations outlined by the Senate Finance
Committee in its report accompanying the legislation. The MEI
attempts to present an equitable measure for changes in the costs of
physicians’ time and operating expenses.
A major change took place in Medicare in 1989 with the enactment
of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 (OBRA), Public
Law 101-239. Section 6102 of PL 101-239 amended Title XVIII of the
Social Security Act by adding Section 1848, Payment for Physician
Services. The new section contained three major elements:
1. 
Establishment of standard rates of increase of expenditures for
physicians’ services
2. 
Replacement of the reasonable charge payment mechanism by a fee
schedule for physicians’ services
3. 
Replacement of the maximum actual allowable charge (MAAC),
which limits the total amount non-QIO physicians could charge
Revisions were made and a new Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1990 was passed. OBRA 1990 contained several modifications
and clarifications of the provisions establishing the physician fee
schedule. This final rule required that before January 1 of each year,
beginning 
with 1992, the Secretary establish, by regulation, fee
schedules that determine payment amounts for all physicians’ services
furnished in all fee schedule areas for the year.
The physician fee schedule is updated each April 15 and is
composed of three basic elements:
1. 
The relative value units (RVUs) for each service
2. 
A geographic adjustment factor to adjust for regional variations in
the cost of operating a health care facility
3. 
A national conversion factor
 The CMS Physician Fee
Schedule Search can be accessed at 
www.cms.gov/apps/physician-fee-
schedule/search/search-criteria.aspx
.
Medicare volume performance standards have been developed to
be used as a tool to monitor annual increases in Part B expenditures
for physicians’ services and, when appropriate, to adjust payment
levels to reflect the success or failure in meeting the performance
standards. Various financial protections have been designed and
instituted on behalf of the Medicare beneficiary.
Relative value unit
Nationally, unit values are assigned for each service and are
determined on the basis of the resources necessary to the physician’s
performance of the service. By analyzing a service, a Harvard team
was able to identify its separate parts and assign each part a relative
value unit (RVU). These parts or components are as follows:
1. 
Work.
 The work component is identified as the amount of time, the
intensity of effort, and the technical expertise required for the
physician to provide the service.
2. 
Overhead.
 The overhead component or 
practice expense
 is
identified as the allocation of costs associated with the physician’s
practice (e.g., rent, staffing, supplies) that must be expended in order
to provide a service.
3. 
Malpractice.
 The malpractice component is identified as the cost of
the medical malpractice insurance coverage/risk associated with
providing the service.
The sum of the units established for each component of the service
equals the total RVUs of a service.
A relative value was established for a midlevel, established-patient
office visit (99213) and all other services are valued at, above, or below
this service relative to the work, overhead, and malpractice expenses
associated with the service.
Geographic practice cost index
The Urban Institute developed scales that measure cost differences in
various areas. The Geographic Practice Cost Indices (GPCIs) have
been established for each of the prevailing charge localities. An entire
state may be considered a locality for purposes of physician payment
reform. The GPCIs reflect the relative costs of practice in a given
locality compared with the national average. A separate GPCI has
been established and is applied to each component of a service.
Conversion factor
The conversion factor (CF) is a national dollar amount that is applied
to all services paid on the basis of the Medicare Fee Schedule.
Congress provided a CF to be used to convert RVUs to dollars.
Updated annually on the basis of the data sources, the CF indicates:
■
 
Percent changes to the Medicare Economic Index (MEI)
■
 
Percent changes in physician expenditures
■
 
Relationship of expenditures to volume performance standards
■
 
Change in access and quality
The CF varies according to the type of service provided (e.g.,
medical, surgical, nonsurgical).
 The Physician Fee Schedule
(PFS) is located at 
www.cms.gov/PhysicianFeeSched/PFSRVF/list.asp
.
Medicare volume performance standards
The Medicare Volume Performance Standards (MVPS) are best
thought of as an object. “It” represents the government’s estimate of
how much growth is appropriate for nationwide physician
expenditures paid by the Part B Medicare program. The purpose of
MVPS is to guide Congress in its consideration of the appropriate
annual payment update.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services must make MVPS
recommendations to Congress by April 15 for the upcoming fiscal
year, and by May 15, the Physician Payment Review Commission
(PPRC) must make its recommendations for the fiscal year. Congress
has until October 15 to establish the MVPS by either accepting or
modifying the two proposed MVPS recommendations.
If Congress does not react by October 15, the MVPS rate is
established by using a default mechanism. If the default mechanism is
used, the Secretary is then required to publish a notice in the 
Federal
Register
 that provides the formula for deriving the MVPS.
Variations in health care usage by Medicare patients occur every
year. Because Medicare strives for a balanced budget, if CMS agrees to
pay for additional services not previously paid for or increases the
weights of CPT codes, thus increasing reimbursement, then discounts
are taken across the board so that more money than authorized is not
spent and the budget remains balanced.
Beneficiary protection
Several provisions in the Physician Payment Reform were designed to
protect Medicare beneficiaries.
1. 
As of September 1, 1990, all providers must file claims for their
Medicare patients (free of charge). In addition, claims must be
submitted according to timely filing guidelines. As of January 1, 2010,
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires physicians
and suppliers to submit claims within 12 months of the service date.
Assigned claims submitted more than 12 months after the date of
service will be denied payment.
2. 
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 requires
participating physicians to accept the amount paid for eligible
Medicaid services (mandatory assignment) as payment in full.
3. 
Effective January 1, 1991, the Maximum Actual Allowable Charge
(MAAC) limitations that applied to nonparticipating physician
charges were replaced by new limits called limiting charges. The
provisions of the new limitations state that nonparticipating
physicians and suppliers cannot charge more than the stated limiting
charge.
Limiting charge
In 1991 and 1992, the limiting charge was specific to each physician.
Beginning in 1993, the limiting charge for a service has been the same
for all physicians within a locality, regardless of specialty.
The limiting charge applies to every service listed in the Medicare
Physicians’ Fee Schedule that is performed by a nonparticipating
physician. This includes global, professional, and technical services
performed by a physician. When a nonphysician provider (e.g.,
portable x-ray supplier, laboratory technician) performs the technical
component of a service that is on the fee schedule, the limiting charge
does not apply. CPT codes are assigned many different prices. The
amount is determined by multiplying the RVU weight by the
geographic index and the conversion factor for the fee schedule
amount. If a physician is participating, he or she receives the fee
schedule amount. If the physician is not participating, the fee schedule
amount or the allowable payment is slightly less than the participating
physician’s payment. 
The limiting charge is a percentage over the
allowable (e.g., 115% times the allowable amount). The limiting
charge is important because that is the maximum amount a Medicare
patient can be billed for a service. For covered services, Medicare
usually pays 80% of the allowable amount for participating
physicians. The beneficiary is then balance-billed, which means that
the patient is billed the difference between what Medicare pays and
the limiting charge.
Example
Limiting charge is
$115
(Maximum charge)
Allowable is
$100
Medicare pays
$80
(Medicare pays 80%)
Patient is billed
$35
($20, 20% of $100, and $15, the remainder of the limiting charge maximum)
Physicians may round the limiting charge to the nearest dollar if
they do this consistently for all services.
Uniformity provision
Equitable use of the Medicare fee schedule requires a payment system
with uniform policies and procedures. Because the relative value of
the work component of a service is the same nationwide (except for a
geographic practice cost adjustment), it is important that when
physicians across the country are paid for a service, they be paid the
same amount, or “package.” For example, the preoperative and
postoperative periods included in the payment must be the same. To
prevent variation in interpretation, standard definitions of services are
required.
Adjustments
Whenever an adjustment of the full fee schedule amount is made to a
service, the limiting charge for that service must also be adjusted.
These adjustments are identified on the physician disclosure, which is
provided to all physicians during the participating enrollment period
each year.
Adjustments to the limiting charge must be manually calculated
before submitting claims for all services in which a fee schedule
limitation applies.
Payments to nonparticipating physicians do not exceed 95% of the
physician fee schedule for a service.
Site-of-service limitations
Services that are performed primarily in office settings are subject to a
payment discount if they are performed in an outpatient hospital
department. There is a national list of procedures that are performed
50% of the time in the office setting. These procedures are subject to
site-of-service limitations for which a discount is taken on any service
that is performed in a setting other than a clinic setting. For instance,
an arthrocentesis is normally performed in the office. If a physician
provides this service in a hospital outpatient setting, the limiting
charge will be less than that for the office setting. This is because the
hospital will also be billing Medicare for the use of the room and the
supplies. Medicare has a built-in practice expense, or overhead, for the
clinic setting (the RVU weight for practice expense), and Medicare
doesn’t want to pay twice for the overhead; therefore, part of the
overhead is reduced from the physician’s payment to offset the
hospital payment. For these procedures, the practice expense RVU is
reduced by 50%. Payment is the lower of the actual charge or the
reduced fee schedule amount.
There are many rules and regulations when reporting Medicare
services, and these rules and regulations become “adjustments” to the
final payments providers receive. As an example, review the
following rules regarding the assignment of just a few modifiers.
Surgical modifier circumstances
Multiple surgeries
General. 
If a surgeon performs more than one procedure on the same patient
on the same day, discounts are made on all subsequent procedures,
excluding add-on codes. Medicare will pay 100% of the fee for the
highest value procedure, 50% for the second most expensive
procedure, and 50% for the third, fourth, and fifth procedures. Each
procedure after the fifth procedure requires documentation and
special review to determine the payment amount. Discounting is why
the order of the codes and the use of modifiers are so important! These
discount amounts are subject to review every year by the CMS.
Third-party payers often follow different discount limits rules from
those of Medicare. It is necessary to keep abreast of payer discounting
rules.
Endoscopic procedures. 
In the case of multiple endoscopic procedures, in the same indented
category of the CPT, Medicare allows the full value of the highest
valued endoscopy, plus the difference between the next highest
endoscopy and the highest valued endoscopy. As in all other
reimbursement issues, some non-Medicare carriers follow this pricing
method, whereas others follow their own multiple-procedure
discounting policies.
Dermatologic surgery. 
For certain dermatology services, there are CPT codes that indicate
that multiple surgical procedures have been performed. When a CPT
code description states “additional,” the general multiple-procedure
rules do not apply. For example, code 11001, which is an indented
code under 11000, states “each additional” in the code description,
and the general multiple-procedure rules do not apply because of this
statement in the code description.
Providers furnishing part of the global fee package. 
Under the fee schedule, Medicare pays the same amount for surgical
services furnished by several physicians as it pays if only one
physician furnished all of the services in the global package.
Medicare pays each physician for his or her part of the global
surgical services. The policy is written with the assumption that the
surgeon always furnishes the usual and necessary preoperative and
intraoperative services and also, with a few exceptions, in-hospital
postoperative services. In most cases, the surgeon also furnishes the
postoperative office services necessary to ensure normal recovery
from the surgery. Recognizing that there are cases in which the
surgeon turns over the out-of-hospital recovery care to another
physician, Medicare has determined percentages of payment if the
postoperative care is furnished by someone other than the surgeon.
These are weighted percentages based on the percentage of total
global surgical work.
For example:
■
 
Preoperative care
15%
■
 
Intraoperative service
70%
■
 
Postoperative care
15%
Again, become familiar with individual third-party payer policies,
because some may not split their global payments in this manner.
Physicians who assist at surgery. 
Physicians assisting the primary physician in a procedure receive a set
percentage of the total fee for the service. Medicare sets the payment
level for assistants-at-surgery at 16% of the fee schedule amount for
the global surgical service. Non-Medicare payers may set this
percentage at 20% or more. CPT modifiers -80 (Assistant Surgeon), -81
(Minimum Assistant Surgeon), and -82 (Assistant Surgeon, when
qualified resident surgeon not available) and HCPCS modifier -AS
(Assistant at Surgery) would be appended to the code to indicate the
type of assistant.
Two surgeons and surgical team. 
When two primary surgeons (usually of different specialties) perform
a procedure, each is paid an equal percentage of the global fee. For co-
surgeons, Medicare pays 125% of the global fee, dividing the payment
equally between the two surgeons (each will receive the lesser of the
actual charge or 62.5% of the 
global fee). No payment is made for an
assistant-at-surgery when co-surgeons perform the procedure.
For team surgery, a medical director determines the payment
amounts on an individual basis. Modifiers -62 (Two Surgeons) or -66
(Surgical Team) would be appended to the procedure code.
Purchased diagnostic services. 
For physicians who bill for a diagnostic test performed by an outside
supplier, the fee schedule amount is limited to the lower of the billing
physician’s fee schedule amount or the price paid for the service.
Reoperations. 
The amount paid by Medicare for a return to the operating room for
treatment of a complication is limited to the intraoperative portion of
the code that best describes the treatment of the complications.
When an unlisted procedure is reported because no other code
exists to describe the treatment, payment is usually based on a
maximum of 50% of the value of the intraoperative services originally
performed.
Modifiers -78 (Return to Operating/Procedure Room for a Related
Procedure During the Postoperative Period) or -79 (Unrelated
Procedure or Service by the Same Physician or Other Qualified Health
Care Professional During the Postoperative Period) would be
appended to the code to more specifically identify that the service was
a reoperation.
Third-party payers have their own guidelines. Many do not apply
discounts for these subsequent surgical procedures.
 CMS publishes the RVUs on
their website (
www.cms.gov/PhysicianFeeSched/PFSRVF/list.asp
). In
your job in the medical office, you may be responsible for
downloading the new RVUs when they are posted, usually in October
of each year. So, it is a good idea to know where to locate this
information!
EXERCISE 1-3
RBRVS
Fill in the blanks with the correct words:
1 
What does RBRVS stand for?
_________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
The Medicare Economic Index is published in what publication?
_________________________________________________________________________________________
3 
In 1989, a major change took place in Medicare with the enactment
of
_________________________________________________________________________________________.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Medicare fraud
Fraud defined
The Medicare program is subject to fraud, as is any third-party payer
program. But because Medicare is the largest third-party payer, it has
the most comprehensive anti-fraud program. You must understand
the specifics of this program because you will be submitting Medicare
claims. CMS is responsible for establishing the regulations that
monitor the Medicare program for fraud. CMS publishes fraud
guidelines for professionals (
www.cms.gov/FraudAbuseforProfs/
)
that contain links to the latest fraud and abuse information.
Fraud
 is the intentional deception or misrepresentation that an
individual knows to be false or does not believe to be true and makes
it knowing that the deception could result in 
some unauthorized
benefit to himself/herself or some other person. Fraud involves both
deliberate intention to deceive and an expectation of an unauthorized
benefit. By this definition, it is fraud if a claim is filed for a service
rendered to a Medicare patient when that service was not actually
provided. How could this type of fraud happen? The fact is that most
Medicare patients sign a standing approval, which assigns benefits to
the provider and is kept on file in the medical office. Having a
standing approval is convenient for the patient and for the coding
staff. After the patient has received a service, the Medicare claim is
filed automatically, without the patient’s actual signature. But a
standing approval also makes it easy for unscrupulous persons to
submit charges for services never provided. This circumstance also
makes it possible for extra services to be submitted in addition to
services that were provided (upcoding). Suppose, for example, a
patient came in for an office visit and a claim was submitted for an in-
office surgical procedure that was not performed. That’s also fraud.
 
CAUTION 
The most common kind of fraud arises from a false statement or
misrepresentation made, or caused to be made, that results in additional
payment by the Medicare program.
Who are the violators? 
The violator may be a physician or other practitioner, a hospital or
other institutional provider, a clinical laboratory or other supplier, an
employee of any provider, a billing service, a beneficiary, a Medicare
employee, or any person in a position to file a claim for Medicare
benefits. You will be the person filing Medicare claims so you have to
be careful about the claims you submit. It is important to validate that
the service was provided by consulting the medical record or the
physician.
Medicare Learning Network (MLN), the CMS educational Center
on the Web, contains publications and computer-based training (CBT)
modules on fraud and abuse (
www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-
Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-
MLN/MLNProducts/WebBasedTraining.html
). The heading labeled
“Related Links Inside CMS” has a link to “Web Based Training (WBT)
Modules” that directs you to a list of courses, and one of them is
“Medicare Fraud and Abuse.”
Fraud schemes range from those committed by individuals acting
alone to broad-based activities perpetrated by institutions or groups of
individuals, sometimes employing sophisticated telemarketing and
other promotional techniques to lure consumers into serving as
unwitting tools in the schemes. Seldom do such perpetrators target
just one insurer; nor do they focus exclusively on either the public or
the private sector. Rather, most are found to be defrauding several
private- and public-sector victims such as Medicare simultaneously.
What forms does fraud take? 
The most common forms of Medicare fraud are:
■
 
Billing for services not furnished
■
 
Misrepresenting a diagnosis to justify a payment
■
 
Soliciting, offering, or receiving a kickback
■
 
Unbundling, or “exploding,” charges
■
 
Falsifying certificates of medical necessity, plans of treatment, and
medical records to justify payment
■
 
Billing for additional services not furnished as billed-up coding
■
 
Routine waiver of copayment
Who says what is fraudulent? 
CMS administers the Medicare program. CMS’s responsibilities
include managing claims payment, overseeing fiscal audit and/or
overpayment prevention and recovery, and developing and
monitoring the payment safeguards necessary to detect and respond
to payment errors or abusive patterns of service delivery. Within
CMS’s Bureau of Program Operations is the Office of Benefits
Integrity (OBI), which oversees Medicare’s payment safeguard
program related to fraud, audit, medical review, the collection of
overpayments, and the imposition of civil monetary penalties (CMPs)
for certain violations of Medicare law.
The Office of the Inspector General (OIG), Department of Health
and Human Services, is responsible for developing an annual work
plan that outlines the ways in which the Medicare program is
monitored to identify fraud and abuse. The plan is a published public
document that provides the evaluation methods and approaches that
will be taken the following year to monitor the Medicare program. For
example, in the 2015 Work Plan, the following was listed as an item
for review during 2015:
TOOLBOX 1-1
 
Susan recently graduated as a medical coder and has been employed
at Island Clinic for three months. While coding last Monday, she
encountered a superbill for a Medicare patient for an office visit for
$62, but there was no supporting documentation in the patient’s
medical record. Susan questioned the physician and he said that he
just forgot to do the paperwork and asked her to send the claim to
Medicare with a promise to complete the paperwork later.
Questions
Susan should do which of the following:
a. 
Complete the claim and send it in, and write a reminder to the
physician to complete the documentation.
b. 
Wait until the physician completes the documentation.
c. 
Inform the physician that she cannot submit a claim without
appropriate documentation in the medical record.
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Nebulizer machines and related drugs—supplier compliance with
payment requirements
We will review Medicare Part B payments for nebulizer machines and related drugs to
determine whether medical equipment suppliers’ claims for nebulizers and related drugs
are medically necessary and are supported in accordance with Medicare requirements.
For calendar year (CY) 2014, Medicare paid approximately $632.8 million for inhalation
drugs. With an improper payment rate of 42 percent, inhalation drugs were sixth on the
list of the top 20 DMEPOS services with the highest improper payments in the 2014
Comprehensive Error Rate Testing report. Medicare requires that such items be
“reasonable and necessary.” (Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A).) Further, the local
coverage determinations (LCDs) issued by the four Medicare contractors that process
medical equipment and supply claims include utilization guidelines and documentation
requirements. (OAS; W-00-14-35465; W-00-15-35465; expected issue date: FY 2016)
14
This excerpt from the OIG Work Plan identifies a specific area that
was monitored in 2015. The OIG charges the MACs with doing the
actual monitoring. The OIG Work Plan sets the broad boundaries for
monitoring the Medicare program for fraud and abuse.
 The site
http://oig.hhs.gov/reports-and-
publications/archives/workplan/2016/oig-plan-2016.pdf
 contains the
fiscal year OIG work plan mid-year update for 2016.
Specific regulations are in the IOMs
CMS establishes the specific regulations in the 
Internet-Only Manuals
(IOMs)
 for the providers and carriers to follow. You will deal with
regulations as you report Medicare services in order to know what is
allowable and what fraud and abuse are.
 The IOMs are located at
www.cms.gov/Manuals/IOM/list.asp
 and publication 100-08,
Medicare Program Integrity Manual presents principles and values to
protect the Medicare program from fraud and abuse.
Attempts to defraud the Medicare program may take a variety of
forms. The following are some more examples of how fraud may be
perpetrated:
■
 
Billing for services or supplies not provided;
■
 
Deliberately applying for duplicate payment (e.g., billing both
Medicare and the beneficiary for the same service or billing both
Medicare and another insurer in an attempt to get paid twice);
■
 
Soliciting, offering, or receiving a kickback, bribe, or rebate (e.g.,
paying for a referral of patients in exchange for the ordering of
diagnostic tests and other services or medical equipment);
■
 
Unbundling or “exploding” charges (e.g., the billing of a
multichannel set of lab tests to appear as if the individual tests had
been performed);
■
 
Completing Certificates of Medical Necessity (CMN) for patients not
personally and professionally known by the provider;
■
 
Misrepresenting the services rendered (up coding or the use of
procedure codes not appropriate for the item or service actually
furnished), amounts charged for services rendered, identity of the
person receiving the services, dates of services, etc.;
■
 
Billing for noncovered services (e.g., routine foot care billed as a
more involved form of foot care to obtain payment);
■
 
Participating in schemes that involve collusion between a provider
and a beneficiary, or between a supplier and a provider, and result
in higher costs or charges to the Medicare program;
■
 
Using another person’s Medicare card to obtain medical care;
■
 
Utilizing split billing schemes (e.g., billing procedures over a period
of days when all treatment occurred during one visit);
■
 
Participating in schemes that involve collusion between a provider
and a carrier employee where the claim is assigned (e.g., the
provider deliberately overbills for services, and the carrier
employee then generates adjustments with little or no awareness on
the part of the beneficiary);
■
 
Billing based on “gang visits” (e.g., a physician visits a nursing
home and bills for 20 nursing home visits without furnishing any
specific service to, or on behalf of, individual patients).
How to protect yourself. 
As you can see from the preceding information about Medicare fraud,
CMS is very serious about identifying those who try to take advantage
of the program. As the person submitting the Medicare claims, you
are one of those whom CMS holds responsible for submitting truthful
and accurate claims. If you are unsure about a charge or a request,
check with the physician or other supervisory personnel to ensure that
you are submitting the correct charges for each patient. In this way,
you protect the Medicare program, your facility, and yourself.
 CMS Fraud and Abuse Web-
Based Training Module is available at 
www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-
Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-
MLN/MLNProducts/WebBasedTraining.html
.
Managed health care
People come from all over the world to the United States of America
to access the health care that U.S. residents take for granted.
Physicians and health care have traditionally been held in high esteem
by U.S. citizens. Whatever it took to provide access to high-quality
health care is what these citizens demanded. Historically, the
government responded to these demands by funding the research,
facilities, and services necessary to keep the U.S. health system on the
cutting edge of medical advances. But the research, facilities, and
services are extremely expensive, and many U.S. citizens are also
demanding a balanced federal budget.
Health care services in the United States are undergoing rapid
change. The U.S. health care system has been financed through
traditional health insurance systems, which paid providers on a fee-
for-service basis and allowed beneficiaries relative freedom in their
selection of health care providers. Health insurance has become an
important benefit of employment. Employers became the primary
purchasers of health insurance, and the rising cost of health care is
reflected in the premiums employers pay and the subsequent decrease
in employer-sponsored coverage. Private purchasers of health
insurance have also seen a steady increase in their health insurance
premiums, while fewer people now have health insurance coverage as
a benefit of 
their employment. One way of containing health care costs
that has widespread popularity is managed health care.
The term “managed health care” refers to the concept of
establishing networks of health care providers that offer an array of
health care services under the umbrella of a single organization. A
managed health care organization may be a group of physicians,
hospitals, and health plans responsible for the health services for an
enrolled individual or group. The organization coordinates the total
health care services required by its enrollees. The purpose of managed
health care is to provide cost-effectiveness of services and theoretically
to improve the health care services provided to the enrollee by
ensuring access to all required health services.
Many models are used to deliver managed health care: Health
Maintenance Organization (HMO), Individual Practice Association
(IPA), Group Practice, Multiple Option Plan, Medicare Risk HMO,
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO), and the Staff model. Each of
these models delivers managed health care using a different structure.
The use of the managed health care approach varies widely with
geography. There continues to be a rise in the percentage of
employers opting for a managed care health plan for their employees;
this indicates the employers’ search for cost containment while
offering the benefit of health coverage to employees.
The pressure on the government to cut expenses and balance the
budget guarantees the continued increases in market share for
managed care. The government mandated the use of managed care
within the Medicaid program, and the number of Medicaid
beneficiaries enrolled in managed care continues to increase.
The managed care industry has evolved from small, regional
nonprofit plans to large, national, for-profit companies. In the early
stages of development, the managed care market included networks
that allowed the enrollees a broad choice of providers. As the market
segments for managed care expanded, choice for the enrollees
decreased.
Types of HMOs
A 
Managed Care Organization (MCO)
 is a group that is responsible
for the health care services offered to an enrolled group or person. The
organization coordinates or manages the care of the enrollee. The
MCO contains costs by negotiating with various health care entities—
hospitals, clinics, laboratories, and so forth—for a discounted rate for
services provided to its enrollees. Providers of the health care services
must receive prior approval from the MCO before services are
rendered. For example, a physician may want to conduct a certain
high-cost diagnostic test, but before the test can be conducted, the
MCO must give the physician approval. The MCO uses a gatekeeper,
usually the primary care physician of the patient, who can authorize
the patient’s need to seek health care services outside of the
established organization. For example, a certain specialist may not be
available within the MCO, and the primary care physician may
recommend that the enrollee be referred to such a specialist. If the
enrollee were to see the specialist without the recommendation of the
primary care physician and the approval of the MCO, the enrollee
would be responsible for charges incurred. MCOs develop practice
guidelines that evaluate the appropriateness and medical necessity of
medical care provided to the enrollee by the physicians, which gives
the MCO control over what care is provided to the enrollee.
A 
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO)
 is a group of providers
who form a network and who have agreed to provide services to
enrollees at a discounted rate. Enrollees are usually responsible for
paying a portion of the costs (cost sharing) when using a PPO
provider. Enrollees who seek health care outside of the PPO providers
pay an additional out-of-pocket cost. The out-of-pocket costs are
established by the PPO to discourage the use of outside providers. The
PPOs do not use a gatekeeper, but they do have strict guidelines that
denote approved expenses and how much the enrollee will pay.
A 
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO)
 is a delivery system
that allows the enrollee access to all health care services. The HMO is
the “total package” approach to health care organizations, and the
out-of-pocket expenses are minimal. However, the enrollee is assigned
a primary care physician who manages all the health care needs of the
enrollee and acts as the gatekeeper for the enrollee. Services are
prepaid by the HMO. For example, the HMO 
pays a laboratory to
provide services at a negotiated price and the services are prepaid by
the HMO. The gatekeeper has authority to allow the enrollee access to
the services available or authorize services outside of those the HMO
has available.
The gatekeeper has strong incentives to contain costs for the HMO
by controlling and managing the health care services provided to the
enrollee. The HMO can directly employ the physician in the Staff
Model HMO or contract the physician through the 
Individual
Practice Associations (IPA)
 model in which the physician provides
services for a set fee. Either way, the physician has an incentive to
service the cost containment needs of the HMO.
An 
Exclusive Provider Organization (EPO)
 has many of the same
features as an HMO except that the providers of the services are not
prepaid. Instead, the providers are paid on a fee-for-service basis. The
Group Practice Model (GPM)
 is a form of HMO in which an
organization of physicians contracts with the HMO to provide
services to the enrollees of the HMO. A payment is negotiated, the
HMO pays the group, and then the group pays the individual
physicians.
Medicare Advantage (formerly Medicare + Choice) is a Medicare-
funded alternative to the standard Medicare supplemental coverage.
Medicare Advantage is an HMO; however, it is provided to Medicare
beneficiaries rather than the traditional fee-for-service model
historically used by Medicare. The enrollees pay out of pocket if they
choose to go outside the network of providers. 
Point-of-Service (POS)
benefits allow enrollees to receive services outside of the HMO’s
health care network, but at increased cost in copayments, in
coinsurance, or in a deductible. The POS benefit is one that the HMO
may choose to offer, but it is not required, and CMS does not provide
any additional funding for this benefit. However, the HMO that offers
this option is more attractive to a potential enrollee, because the lack
of access to providers outside of a predefined network is the one
reason people do not join a managed health care organization. The
POS benefit option is also referred to as an 
open-ended HMO
 or a
self-referral option
. The POS benefit is attractive not only to Medicare
enrollees who wish to be treated by providers not available in their
plan’s network but also to those who travel and would like access to
routine medical care while temporarily (fewer than 90 days) out of
their plan’s service area.
Program for All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE)
 is a
program developed to address the needs of long-term care clients,
providers, and payers. The program provides a comprehensive
package of services that permits the clients to continue to live in their
homes while receiving services rather than being placed in an
institution.
Managed health care is now part of the fabric of the U.S. health care
system. The “richer” plans of traditional insurance companies are
often no longer an option to a great segment of the population.
Drawbacks of the HMO. 
There are some significant drawbacks to the HMO concept in terms of
access to health care. Consider that providers (physicians in
particular) have an incentive to keep treatment costs to a minimum.
Traditionally, a physician’s primary concern was what was in the best
interest of the patient, not what was in the best interest of cost
containment. This fundamental change transformed physicians into
gatekeepers for third-party payers and transformed third-party payers
into developers of guidelines that ultimately control the services
patients can and do receive. The patient-physician relationship has
shifted to include a physician/third-party-payer relationship, which
leaves the patient at the mercy of the third-party payer. Many lawsuits
have been brought by patients who allege that lack of treatment
caused harm and sometimes death. Cost-containment issues, and
hence HMOs, raise many ethical and legal issues that will continue to
involve patients, providers, and third-party payers.
EXERCISE 1-4
Medicare Fraud/Abuse and Managed
Health Care
Fill in the blanks for the following questions:
1 
This term is the intentional deception or misrepresentation that an
individual knows to be false or does not believe to be true and
makes knowing that the deception could result in some
unauthorized benefit. _______________________________________
2 
This organization develops a work plan to identify areas of the
Medicare program that will be monitored. ____________________
3 
The physician responsible for controlling and managing the health
care of an HMO enrollee is the _________________________.
4 
What does the abbreviation PACE stand for?
________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
In March 2010, the President signed into law the Affordable Care
Act. The law put into place comprehensive health insurance reforms
with the hope that insurance companies would be more accountable,
lower health care costs, guarantee more health care choices, and
enhance the quality of health care. It’s estimated 11.4 million
Americans were signed-up for or automatically re-enrolled in
coverage as of February 2015.
15
 For more information about
the key features of the Affordable Care Act, go to
www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts/timeline/index.html
.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 1, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What services do Medicare Part A, B, and D pay?
____________________________
2 The Privacy Rule standards address the use and disclosure of
individuals’ health information called ____________________.
3 Updates of special interest to hospital facilities are published in
which month in the 
Federal Register
? __________________
4 In the RBRVS system, payments for services are determined by the
resource costs needed to provide them. The cost of providing each
service is divided into what three components? _______________,
_______________, _________________
5 Who is responsible for developing an annual work plan to identify
fraud? ________________________________________
6 The purpose of managed health care is to provide ____________
services and theoretically to ___________ the health care services
provided to the enrollee.
Chapter 1, part I, theory
Complete the following:
1 Two insurance programs were established in 1965 by amendments
to the Social Security Act known as Part _____ and Part _____.
2 The Secretary of DHHS has delegated responsibility for Medicare to
which department? ___________________ (acronym)
3 Who administers funds for Medicare?
____________________________________________________________________
4 Who is eligible for Medicare? (select all that apply)
a permanent kidney failure
b 65 and over
c 60 and over
d disability benefits
e chronic conditions
5 Three components of the relative value unit are work, overhead (or
practice expense), and __________________________
6 What does RBRVS stand for?
____________________________________________________________________________
7 What is the fastest growing segment of our population today?
__________________________________________________
8 What is the name given to the groups that handle the daily
operations of the Medicare program? ___________ s (acronym)
Chapter 1, part II, practical
Using what you have learned from Chapter 1, match the correct term with
the statement provided.
9 Intentional deception or misrepresentation is known as _____.
10 Quality Improvement Organizations were previously termed
_____.
11 MS-DRG assignment reports _____ services.
12 October editions of the 
Federal Register
 are of special interest to
_____.
13 OBRA 1990 contained modifications and clarifications regarding
the _____.
a Part B
b abuse
c fraud
d PROs
e Part D
f outpatient facilities
g hospital facilities
h PPOs
i Part A
j Physician Fee Schedule
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
References
1.  
Administration on Aging (AOA)
 The Older Population.
Available at:
www.aoa.acl.gov/aging_statistics/Profile/2014/3.aspx
2.  
Administration for Community Living (ACL)
 Justification of
Estimates for Appropriations Committees. Available at:
http://acl.gov/About_ACL/Budget/docs/FY_2017_ACL_CJ.pdf
3.  
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 National Health
Expenditure Projections 2014–2024. Available at:
www.cms.gov/Research-Statistices-Data-and-
Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/proj2014.pdf
4.  
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 CMS Mission,
Vision, & Goals. Available at:
http://surveyortraining.cms.bbs.gov/bhfs/m1/M1S1_180.aspx
5.  
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 Archives. Available
at: 
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Contracting/Medicare-
Administrative-Contractors/Archives.html
6.  
Federal Business Opportunities
 RFI - Postponement of Final
Two A/B MAC Contract Consolidations. Available at:
www.fbo.gov/index?
s=opportunity&mode=form&id=97379d7710bcfb0222cb6fdc465c540e&tab=core&_cview=
7.  
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 Medicare
Administrative Contractors (MACs). Available at:
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Contracting/Medicare-
Administrative-Contractors/Downloads/MACs-by-State-Jan-
2016.pdf
8.  
The Official U.S. Government Site for Medicare
 Medicare 2016
Costs at a Glance. Available at: 
www.medicare.gov/your-
medicare-costs/costs-at-a-glance/costs-at-glance.html
9.  
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 Hospice. Available
at: 
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-fee-for-service-
payment/hospice/index.html
10.  
Department of Health and Human Services:
 Health Insurance
Reform: Modifications to Electronic Data Transaction
Standards Code Sets. Available at:
www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-
Administrative-
Simplification/TransactionCodeSetsStands/downloads/ModificationstoElectronicDataTransactionStandardsandCodeSets.pdf
11.  
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 New Health Care
Electronic Transactions Standards Versions 5010, D.0, and 3.0.
Available at:
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/downloads/w5010BasicsFctSht.pdf
12.  1996 HCFA Statistics. Bureau of Data Management, HCFA
Pub. No. 03394, Sept. 1996.
13.  
. 
Federal Register
 January 19, 2016;81(11):2805.
14.  
Office of Inspector General
 Work Plan Fiscal Year 2016.
Available at: 
http://oig.hhs.gov/reports-and-
publications/archives/workplan/2016/oig-work-plan-2016.pdf
15.  
Key features of the Affordable Care Act
. Available at:
www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts/timeline/index.html
UNIT 2
ICD-10-CM
OUTLINE
2.  An overview of ICD-10-CM
3.  ICD-10-CM outpatient coding and reporting
guidelines
4.  Using ICD-10-CM
5.  Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-10-CM
chapters 1-10)
6.  Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-10-CM
chapters 11-14)
7.  Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-10-CM
chapters 15-21)
CHAPTER 2
An overview of ICD-10-CM
 
“What an exciting time to be a coder! ICD-10 brought so many
changes, coders are more important than ever before. It’s a great time
to begin a career in coding.”
Sheri Poe Bernard, CPC, COC, CPC-I
 
Coding Education Specialist
 
Salt Lake City, Utah
CHAPTER TOPICS
The ICD-10-CM
ICD-10-CM Replaces the ICD-9-CM, Volumes 1 and 
2
Improvements in the ICD-10-CM
Structure of the System
Mapping
ICD-10-CM Format
Index
Tabular
Official Instructional Notations in the ICD-10-CM
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Explain the development of the ICD-10-CM.
2 
Describe how the ICD-10-CM replaces the ICD-9-CM, Volumes 1
and 2.
3 
Identify the improvements in the ICD-10-CM.
4 
List the official instructional notations in ICD-10-CM.
5 
Describe the format of ICD-10-CM.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Note: In this text 
ICD-10
 is the WHO’s code system and 
I-10
 refers
to the ICD-10-CM.
Note: ICD-9-CM Supplemental Chapters can be found in the
Student Evolve Resources.
The ICD-10-CM
The International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision, Clinical
Modification (ICD-10-CM) is designed for the classification of patient
morbidity (sickness) and mortality (death) information for statistical
purposes and for the indexing of health records by disease and
operations, data storage and retrieval.
The 10th revision of the 
International Classification of Diseases
 (ICD-
10) was issued in 1993 by the World Health Organization (WHO), and
WHO is responsible for maintaining it. The ICD-10, the WHO version,
does not include a procedure classification. Each world government is
responsible for adapting the ICD-10 to suit its own country’s needs.
For example, Australia uses the ICD-10-AM, that is, the ICD-10-
Australian Modification. Each government is responsible for ensuring
that its modification conforms with the WHO’s conventions in the
ICD-10. In the United States, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services is responsible for developing the procedure classification
entitled the ICD-10-PCS (Procedure Coding System). The National
Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) is responsible for the disease
classification system entitled ICD-10-CM (CM stands for Clinical
Modification).
The material in this text is based on the 2016 version of the I-10.
Guidance for the use of I-10 is available at 
www.cms.gov/ICD10
.
Through the years, the use of diagnostic coding has grown. The
Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-360) required
the submission of the appropriate diagnosis codes, with charges
submitted to Medicare Part B (outpatient services). The law was later
repealed, but the coding requirement still stands.
Although coding was originally designed to provide access to
medical records through retrieval for medical research, education, and
administration, today codes are used to:
1. 
Facilitate payment of health services
2. 
Evaluate patients’ use of health care facilities (utilization patterns)
3. 
Study health care costs
4. 
Research the quality of health care
5. 
Predict health care trends
6. 
Plan for future health care needs
The use and results of coding are widespread and evident in our
everyday lives. Many people hear the results of coding on a regular
basis and don’t even know it. Anytime you listen to the news and hear
the newscaster refer to a specific number of AIDS cases in the United
States or read a news article about an epidemic of measles, you are
seeing the results of diagnostic coding. The I-10 classification system is
totally compatible with its parent system (ICD-10), thus meeting the
need for comparability of morbidity and mortality statistics at the
international level. A classification system means that each condition
or disease can be coded to only one code as much as possible to
ensure the validity and reliability of data; this classification system is
used to track morbidity and mortality.
Coding must be performed correctly, consistently, and ethically to
produce meaningful statistics. AAPC posts an Ethics Policy online
(
https://www.aapc.com/aboutus/code-of-ethics.aspx
) to define proper
ethical conduct and guide it’s members accordingly. To code
accurately, it is necessary to have an in-depth knowledge of medical
terminology, anatomy and physiology, disease conditions, and
pharmacology, along with an understanding of the I-10 coding
guidelines, format, and conventions.
Transforming verbal or narrative descriptions of diseases, injuries,
conditions, and procedures into alphanumeric designations is a
complex activity and should not be undertaken without proper
training. Learning to use the I-10 codes will be a valuable tool to you
in any health care career.
ICD-10-CM replaces the ICD-9-CM,
volumes 1 and 2
The I-10 was developed by the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) and replaces I-9, Volumes 1 and 2. Prior to the
implementation of the new edition, extensive consultation and review
took place with physician groups, clinical coders, and others. The
NCHS established a 20-member Technical Advisory Panel of
representatives of the health care and coding communities to provide
input during the development of the 10th revision.
EXERCISE 2-1
The ICD-10-CM
Without the use of reference material, answer the following:
1 
The I-10 was originally issued in 1993 by ___________________.
a 
CMS
b 
AHIMA
c 
AHA
d 
WHO
2 
This country currently uses the ICD-10-AM: ___________________.
a 
Argentina
b 
Africa
c 
Australia
d 
Austria
3 
The I-10 is designed for the classification of patient ____________ or
____________.
4 
The CM in ICD-10-CM stands for ____________.
5 
List four of the six reasons why diagnosis codes are used
today.________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________.
6
 The I-10 is used to translate what descriptive information into
alphanumeric codes? ____________ or ____________.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Improvements in the ICD-10-CM
Notable improvements in the content and format of the I-10 include
the following:
1. 
Addition of information relevant to ambulatory and managed care
encounters
Example
Y92.53 Ambulatory health services establishments as the place of
occurrence of the external cause
Y92.530 Ambulatory surgery center as the place of occurrence of
the external cause
Outpatient surgery center, including that connected with a hospital as
the place of occurrence of the external cause
Same day surgery center, including that connected with a hospital as
the place of occurrence of the external cause
2. 
Expansion of injury codes
Example
Y93 Activity codes
Y93.4 Activities involving dancing and other
rhythmic movement
EXCLUDES1:
  activity, martial arts (Y93.75)
Y93.41 Activity, dancing
Y93.42 Activity, yoga
Y93.43 Activity, gymnastics
Activity, rhythmic gymnastics
EXCLUDES1:
  activity, trampolining (Y93.44)
Y93.44 Activity, trampolining
Y93.45 Activity, cheerleading
3. 
Extensive expansion of the injury codes, allowing for greater
specificity
Example
S50.351 is the code for superficial foreign body of right elbow. The 7th
character designates the encounter: A - Initial encounter, D -
subsequent encounter, S - sequela.
4. 
Creation of combination diagnosis/symptom codes to reduce the
number of codes needed to fully describe a condition
Example
I25.110 is the code for atherosclerotic heart disease of native coronary
artery with unstable angina pectoris. Only one code is required in
ICD-10-CM.
5. 
The addition of a sixth character
Example
S06.336 is the code to report unspecified contusion and laceration of
the cerebrum, with loss of consciousness greater than 24 hours
without return to pre-existing conscious level with the patient
surviving (requires a 7th character to describe the encounter (A, D, or
S).
6. 
The incorporation of common fourth- and fifth-character
subclassifications
Example
F10.14 is the five-character code to report alcohol abuse with alcohol-
induced mood disorder.
7. 
Updating and greater specificity of diabetes mellitus codes
Example
E11.21 reports Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic nephropathy.
8. 
Facilitation of providing greater specificity when assigning codes 
 Third-party companies
typically employ 
Clinical Documentation Improvement (CDI)
specialists, who are then hired by medical providers to advise and
implement programs that improve documentation practices. The use
of CDI is especially important to ensure documentation is specific
enough to support the level of detail required from ICD-10-CM/ICD-
10-PCS. Ultimately, it’s the coders’ responsibility to follow up with the
provider in order to ensure proper documentation that meets the
quality of coding, medical necessity, and denial standards of ICD-10-
CM/ICD-10-PCS.
 
QUICK CHECK 2-1
1. 
According to the “Expansion of injury codes” example box, what
activity code would you reference for an injury on a trampoline?
________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Structure of the system
Chapter titles in the I-10 remain similar to those in the I-9 with the
presence of two new chapters: 
Chapter 7
, Diseases of the Eye and
Adnexa, and 
Chapter 8
, Diseases of the Ear and Mastoid Process.
Chapter 1
 Certain Infectious and Parasitic Diseases (A00-B99)
Chapter 2
 Neoplasms (C00-D49)
Chapter 3
 Diseases of the Blood and Blood-Forming Organs and
Certain Disorders Involving the Immune Mechanism (D50-D89)
Chapter 4
 Endocrine, Nutritional, and Metabolic Diseases (E00-E89)
Chapter 5
 Mental, Behavioral and Neurodevelopmental Disorders
(F01-F99)
Chapter 6
 Diseases of the Nervous System (G00-G99)
Chapter 7
 Diseases of the Eye and Adnexa (H00-H59)
Chapter 8
 Diseases of the Ear and Mastoid Process (H60-H95)
Chapter 9
 Diseases of the Circulatory System (I00-I99)
Chapter 10
 Diseases of the Respiratory System (J00-J99)
Chapter 11
 Diseases of the Digestive System (K00-K95)
Chapter 12
 Diseases of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue (L00-L99)
Chapter 13
 Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System and Connective
Tissue (M00-M99)
Chapter 14
 Diseases of the Genitourinary System (N00-N99)
Chapter 15
 Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the Puerperium (O00-O9A)
Chapter 16
 Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period
(P00-P96)
Chapter 17
 Congenital Malformations, Deformations and
Chromosomal Abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
Chapter 18
 Symptoms, Signs, and Abnormal Clinical and Laboratory
Findings, Not Elsewhere Classified (R00-R99)
Chapter 19
 Injury, Poisoning and Certain Other Consequences of
External Causes (S00-T88)
Chapter 20
 External Causes of Morbidity (V00-Y99)
Chapter 21
 Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact with Health
Services (Z00-Z99)
Mapping
As a part of the conversion, two sets of diagnosis code General
Equivalence Mappings (GEMs) have been developed. This mapping is
a type of crosswalk to find corresponding diagnosis codes between
the two code sets. The two GEMs files are:
1. 
I-9 to I-10, which is forward mapping
2. 
I-10 to I-9, which is backward mapping
Fig. 2-1
 displays GEMs mapping files for codes from I-9 to I-10.
Note that the GEMs files do not contain decimal points. For example,
in the GEMs file for I-9, code 001.0 is 0010 and code 001.1 is 0011. For
I-10 codes, A00.0 is A000 and A00.1 is A001. In 
Fig. 2-1
, column 1
displays the I-9 codes and column 2 displays the I-10 codes. 
Fig. 2-2
displays the mapping for codes from the I-10 code system to the I-9
code system. In 
Fig. 2-2
, column 1 displays the I-10 code and column 2
displays the equivalent I-9 code. Column 3 in both figures is the
“Flag” designation, which will be reviewed next.
 
FIGURE 2–1
GEMs mapping files I-9 to I-10.
 
FIGURE 2–2
GEMs mapping files I-10 to I-9.
Flags
There are three different types of flag designations:
■
 
Approximate
■
 
No Map
■
 
Combination
Approximate
Approximate, flag 0. 
The Approximate, Flag 0, means there is a direct match between the
two coding systems, and the GEMs file directs the coder to a 
single
entry. The conversion between the two code sets is straightforward:
the I-10 code A02.21 maps to 003.21 in the I-9 code system.
Example
003.21
 (Salmonella meningitis)
A02.21
 (Salmonella meningitis)
Example
I-10
I-9
Flag
A0221
00321
00000
Approximate, flag 1. 
The I-10 code set has a more consistent level of detail, such as a more
extensive vocabulary of clinical concepts, body part specificity, and
patient encounter information. There are five times more codes in the
I-10 (69,000+) than in the I-9 (14,000+), so the I-9 code is often linked to
more than one I-10 code. The Approximate, Flag 1, assists in the
process of conversion by identifying those times when more than one
code in the I-10 is available to replace an I-9 code. For example, stress
fractures in the I-9 are reported with codes in the 733.93-733.98 range,
and although some of the codes are for specific bones (e.g., fibula,
metatarsals, femur), a code such as 733.95 reports “other” bones. Code
733.95 is reported when there is not a specific code to report the stress
fracture stated in the diagnosis. As such, 733.95 becomes an umbrella
code that is assigned to a wide variety of stress fracture diagnoses.
The I-10 code set expands the stress fracture codes (M84.3) to be more
specific. For example, 
Fig. 2-3
 illustrates the specificity of code M84.31,
Stress fracture, shoulder.
 
FIGURE 2–3
 
Specificity of M84.31, Stress fracture, shoulder.
Note that M84.311 reports the right shoulder and M84.312 reports
the left shoulder. This 
laterality
 is utilized throughout I-10.
Note that in addition to the specific anatomical location and
laterality (right, left) of M84.31, a 7th character is also reported to
indicate the episode of care, as illustrated in 
Fig. 2-4
. This greater
detail in the I-10 results in one I-10 code reporting what would have
taken several I-9 codes to report.
 
FIGURE 2–4
M84.3 7th character assigned to increase specificity.
The Approximate, Flag 1, assists the coder in choosing the correct
code to reference by listing all of the possible choices. For example, the
I-9 to I-10 GEMs file maps 16 possible I-10 codes for 733.95, Stress
fracture of other bone, based on the specific location of 
the fracture.
Some of the GEMs file entries for 733.95 are displayed in 
Fig. 2-5
 along
with the I-10 Tabular entries for the codes.
 
CAUTION 
The medical documentation must be reviewed to determine the exact location
of the stress fracture for correct I-10 code assignment.
FIGURE 2–5
A,
 I-9 to I-10 GEMs file entries for code 733.95. 
B,
 I-10
Tabular code descriptions.
Entire chapters of the I-10, such as obstetrics, have been
reorganized, and the conversion from I-9 to I-10 is more complex. For
example, spotting complicating pregnancy in the I-9 is based on
episode of care
 and in the I-10 these codes are based on the 
trimester
.
Example
ICD-9
649.50
Spotting complicating pregnancy, 
unspecified as to episode of care or not applicable
649.51
Spotting complicating pregnancy, 
delivered with or without mention of antepartum condition
649.53
Spotting complicating pregnancy, 
antepartum condition or complication
ICD-10
O26.851
 Spotting complicating pregnancy, 
first trimester
O26.852
 Spotting complicating pregnancy, 
second trimester
O26.853
 Spotting complicating pregnancy, 
third trimester
O26.859
 Spotting complicating pregnancy, 
unspecified trimester
Example
In the I-9 to I-10 GEMs file, the entry for 649.50-649.53 indicates that
the choice of correct code would be based on the new information of
trimester:
I-9
I-10
Flag
64950
O26859
10000
64951
O26851
10000
64951
O26852
10000
64951
O26853
10000
64953
O26852
10000
64953
O26853
10000
64953
O26851
10000
Example
In the I-10 to I-9 GEMs file, the entry for O26.851-O26.859 is:
I-10
I-9
Flag
O26851
64951
10000
O26851
64953
10000
O26852
64953
10000
O26852
64951
10000
O26853
64951
10000
O26853
64953
10000
O26859
64950
10000
The 10000 flag indicates that although there is a one-to-one code
mapping, the codes may not be exactly the same because the choice of
code depends on the trimester. The majority of the flags in the GEMs
files are Flag 1 with either a 1 or 0.
No map. 
No Map
 means that there is no similar code from one coding system
to the other. When this occurs, there will be a 1 as the second character
in Flag 2. For example, the I-10 code, T36.6X6A, Poisoning by, adverse
effect of and underdosing of rifampicins, initial encounter, has no
match in I-9. In the I-9 column, “NoDx” appears and there is a 1 in the
Flag 2 position.
Example
I-10
I-9
Flag
T366X6A
NoDx
11000
Combination. 
The 
Combination
 Flag 3 (third character in the flag) contains a 1 when
a code from the source system must be linked to more than one code
in the target system to be valid. For example, in the I-10 system,
R65.21, Severe sepsis with septic shock, would require two I-9 codes
(995.92, Severe sepsis, and 785.52, Septic shock) to fully report. The I-
10 GEMs file displays this requirement with a 1 in the third field, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 2-6
.
 
FIGURE 2–6
I-10 mapping files for combination code R65.21.
Scenario and choice list. 
The fourth field is the 
Scenario
 field and the fifth field is the 
Choice
List
. These two numbers appear after the three flags and indicate a
further subdivision of the flags. The Scenario is the number of
variations of diagnosis combinations included in the source system
code. As illustrated in 
Fig. 2-7,
 in R65.21, the 4th character is 1,
indicating that there is only one valid combination of I-9 codes (995.92
and 785.52).
 
FIGURE 2–7
Scenario and Choice List fields.
The Choice List indicates the possible target system codes that when
combined are one valid scenario. For example, in 
Fig. 2-7
 the 2 in the
Choice List position (5th place) for 995.92 indicates that the code is the
second of two codes that when combined with the Choice List 1
makes a valid scenario.
There are times when the fourth field (Scenario) is a number other
than a 0 or 1. For example, in the I-9, there is a code for poisoning by
succinimides (966.2) and a code for poisoning by oxazolidine
derivatives (oxazolidinediones) (966.0). Either of these codes could be
combined with E855.8 (Other specified drugs acting on central and
autonomic nervous systems) to report how the poisoning occurred.
However, in the I-10 coding system the two substances are combined
in one code: T42.2X1A, Poisoning by succinimides and
oxazolidinediones, accidental (unintentional), initial encounter. This
means that both 996.2 and E855.8 are reported with the one I-10 code
T42.2X1A and both 996.0/E855.8 are also reported with T42.2X1A. The
GEMs file illustrates that E855.8 can be used in multiple combinations
by placing a 2 in the fourth field (
Fig. 2-8
).
 
FIGURE 2–8
GEMs file for E8558.
EXERCISE 2-2
GEMs Files and Activity Codes
To access the GEMs files, start by logging into your Evolve Learning
Resources (or registering for FREE at
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step).
 
Access your “Step-by-Step
Medical Coding” course, then:
• 
Click “Course Documents”
• 
Click “Resources”
• 
Click “Coding Updates, Tips, and Links”
• 
Click ”GEMs files (2015)”
• 
Select the appropriate GEMs files
With the use of the two GEMs files, answer the following:
Using the I-9 to I-10 GEMs file, map the following codes:
1 
005.89 ___________________
2 
016.01 ___________________
3 
150.0 ____________________
4 
919.8 ____________________
5 
E841.3 ___________________
6 
V24.1 ____________________
a 
C15.3
b 
T07
c 
A05.8
d 
Z39.1
e 
A18.11
f 
V95.8XXA
According to the I-10 to I-9 GEMs file, map the following codes:
7 
S06.1X8A ________________
8 
T38.903S _________________
9 
D75.81 __________________
10 
A02.29 __________________
11 
M35.09 ___________________
12 
R65.20 ___________________
a 
003.29
b 
289.83
c 
854.05 and 348.5
d 
995.92
e 
710.2
f 
909.0 and E969
According to the examples previously presented in the text or in
the I-10 Tabular, match the activity code description to the correct I-10
code:
13 
Y93.01 ___________________
14 
Y93.11 ___________________
15 
Y93.34 ___________________
a 
bungee jumping
b 
walking, marching, and hiking
c 
swimming
16 
When 00000 is displayed in the Flag field, the following is true about the target coding system: ___________________
a 
there are multiple entries available
b 
there is only a single entry available
c 
there is no code available
d 
any of the above may be true
17 
The third character in the Flag field is this type of flag: ___________________
a 
combination
b 
approximate
c 
scenario
d 
choice list
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
ICD-10-CM format
The I-10 Alphabetic Index and Tabular are used in outpatient settings
to substantiate the reason for receiving medical services (medical
necessity) by assigning diagnosis codes. ICD-10-PCS is used for
coding surgical, therapeutic, and diagnostic procedures and is used
primarily by hospitals. Today, more than 95 percent of claims are filed
electronically using the 5010 claim format required under HIPAA.
Examples of the 5010 format can be seen in Figs. F-1 through F-8
(located in 
Appendix F
). I-10 codes can also be reported on the CMS-
1500 insurance claim form (
Fig. 2-9
). Government and private insurers
require diagnostic codes to be submitted to show the medical
necessity of services provided. Several publishing companies produce
versions of the I-10 manual. All versions are based on the official
government version of the I-10.
FIGURE 2–9
CMS–1500 Health Insurance Claim Form
There are four groups whose function it is to deal with in-depth
coding principles and practices: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS), which was formerly known as the Health Care
Financing Administration (HCFA); National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS); American Health Information Management
Association (AHIMA); and American Hospital Association (AHA).
Index
The I-10 Index is alphabetic, as illustrated in 
Fig. 2-10
. As in the I-9,
the I-10 index presents the main terms in bold type, and subterms
indented under the main term. After the index entry, a code is
provided. Sometimes, only the first four characters of the code are
listed. As a coder, 
you will reference the Index first and then locate the
code identified in the Index in the Tabular List. Everything in the
Index is listed by condition—meaning diagnosis, signs, symptoms,
and conditions such as pregnancy, admission, encounter, or
complication. To ensure that you have chosen the correct code and/or
to obtain the remaining characters, you must always reference the
Tabular.
 
CAUTION 
ICD-10-CM manuals vary considerably depending on the publisher.
 
FIGURE 2–10
ICD-10-CM Index.
The Alphabetic Index consists of three sections:
■
 
Index to Diseases and Injuries
■
 
Table of Drugs and Chemicals
■
 
External Cause of Injuries Index
There is one table located within the Index to Diseases and Injuries.
This table is used to better list the subterms under the main term entry
of neoplasm.
Note:
 Please refer to the companion Evolve website for the most
current guidelines.
The ICD-10-CM Index utilizes three levels of indentation in the
Alphabetic Index. They are the:
■
 
Main terms
■
 
Subterms
■
 
Carryover lines
The main terms are identified by 
bold
 print and are flush with the
left margin of each column. Alphabetization rules apply in locating
main terms and subterms in the Alphabetic Index. Numerical entries
appear first under the main term or subterm. Each term is followed by
the code or codes that apply to the term (
Fig. 2-11
).
 
FIGURE 2–11
Main terms are capitalized and in bold print. Subterms
are indented two spaces to the right under the term above.
 
QUICK CHECK 2-2
According to 
Fig. 2-10
, what is the code you would reference in the
Tabular for:
1. 
aberrant basilar artery? ________________
2. 
acute abdomen? ________________
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix
C
)
EXERCISE 2-3
Main Terms
Underline the main terms to be located in the Alphabetic Index in the
following diagnostic statements:
1 
Normocytic anemia
2 
Acute prostatitis
3 
Severe protein calorie malnutrition
4 
Granuloma lung
5 
Pain in neck
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
The subterms under the main terms are indented to the right. They
begin with a lowercase letter and are not bolded. These subterms
modify the main term and are called 
essential modifiers
. These
subterms provide greater specificity for proper code assignment. It is
possible for a subterm to be followed by an additional subterm(s).
These additional subterms are indented even farther to the right.
Example
Incoordinate, incoordination
esophageal-pharyngeal (newborn)—
see
 Dysphagia
muscular R27.8
The term in parentheses (newborn) is nonessential and merely
supplementary. The indented subterms are essential modifiers, such
as muscular.
General adjectives such as “acute,” “chronic,” “epidemic,” or
“hereditary” and references to anatomic site, such as “arm,”
“stomach,” and “uterus,” will appear as main terms, but they will
have a “see” or “
see also
 condition” reference.
Example
Hereditary
—
see
 condition
Uveal
—
see
 condition
Certain subterms are called connecting words. These define a
relationship between a main term or a subterm and an associated
condition or etiology. The connecting words “with” or “without” are
located immediately after the main term and before any other
subterms. Some additional connecting words are “associated with,”
“due to,” “with mention of ” or “in.” Carryover lines are used when
there is not enough space on a single line for an entry. They are
indented to the right even farther than a subterm to avoid confusion,
as illustrated in 
Fig. 2-12
.
 
FIGURE 2–12
Carryover lines are indented five spaces to the right.
Tabular
After referencing the Alphabetic Index, you will locate the code(s)
identified in the Tabular. 
You can never code directly from the Index.
Rather, you must always reference the Index and then verify the code
number in the Tabular.
The Tabular List is the listing of all the codes available for
assignment, including their descriptions. When the exact word is not
found in the code description in the Tabular List but the descriptive
word is found in the Alphabetic Index, you must trust the code
provided in the Alphabetic Index to be correct because the Index
contains descriptive words that the Tabular 
does not
. Not listing all
possible descriptive terms in the Tabular saves space.
Anything that can happen, in the way of injury or disease, to a
human body has a code in the Tabular List. Although there are
certainly many things that can happen to us, the people who
developed the ICD-10-CM not only included them all but organized
them in a systematic way.
Chapters
A chapter is the main division in the ICD-10-CM manual. The 21
chapters of the Tabular are arranged in numeric order after the first
letter assigned to the chapter and are as follows:
Chapter 1
 Certain Infectious and Parasitic Diseases (A00-B99)
Chapter 2
 Neoplasms (C00-D49)
Chapter 3
 Diseases of the Blood and Blood-Forming Organs and
Certain Disorders Involving the Immune Mechanism (D50-D89)
Chapter 4
 Endocrine, Nutritional, and Metabolic Diseases (E00-E89)
Chapter 5
 Mental, Behavioral and Neurodevelopmental Disorders
(F01-F99)
Chapter 6
 Diseases of the Nervous System (G00-G99)
Chapter 7
 Diseases of the Eye and Adnexa (H00-H59)
Chapter 8
 Diseases of the Ear and Mastoid Process (H60-H95)
Chapter 9
 Diseases of the Circulatory System (I00-I99)
Chapter 10
 Diseases of the Respiratory System (J00-J99)
Chapter 11
 Diseases of the Digestive System (K00-K95)
Chapter 12
 Diseases of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue (L00-L99)
Chapter 13
 Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System and Connective
Tissue (M00-M99)
Chapter 14
 Diseases of the Genitourinary System (N00-N99)
Chapter 15
 Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the Puerperium (O00-O9A)
Chapter 16
 Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period
(P00-P96)
Chapter 17
 Congenital Malformations, Deformations and
Chromosomal Abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
Chapter 18
 Symptoms, Signs, and Abnormal Clinical and Laboratory
Findings, Not Elsewhere Classified (R00-R99)
Chapter 19
 Injury, Poisoning and Certain Other Consequences of
External Causes (S00-T88)
Chapter 20
 External Causes of Morbidity (V00-Y99)
Chapter 21
 Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact with Health
Services (Z00-Z99)
The ICD-10-CM begins with A and continues through Z. Due to the
complexity of some chapters in ICD-10-CM, a chapter may use more
than one letter (example: Neoplasms are all of the letter C and half of
the letter D), or only part of one letter (example: Eye and Adnexa are
half of the letter H). Although there is no significance to the letters
assigned to each chapter other than alphabetic order, there are
numerous chapter code sets that start with letters that seem intuitive.
For example, 
Chapter 15
 Pregnancy, Childbirth and the Puerperium,
uses only the letter O. If you think “obstetrics,” you will instantly
know which letter pregnancy codes begin with. This trick is called a
mnemonic (new-MON-ick) device, and there are many for
remembering ICD-10 chapters:
Neoplasms (C00-D49)
“C for cancer”
Endocrine, Nutritional, and Metabolic Diseases (E00-E89)
“E for endocrine”
Nervous System (G00-G99)
“G for ganglia”
Ear and Mastoid Process (H60-H95)
“H for hearing”
Circulatory System (I00-I99)
“I for infarct”
Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue (M00-M99)
“M for musculoskeletal”
Genitourinary System (N00-N99)
“N for nephrology”
Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period (P00-P96)
“P for perinatal”
Think of your own mnemonic devices for the other chapters, as they
are very helpful when beginning to work with a new coding system.
Fig. 2-13
 illustrates a portion of the chapter concerning symptoms.
Note that in the Index (see 
Fig. 2-10
) the main entry is Abdomen,
abdominal, and the first subterm is “acute,” directing the coder to the
Tabular location, R10.0. Now, note in the Tabular (see 
Fig. 2-13
) the
location of R10.0 as Acute abdomen.
 
FIGURE 2–13
ICD-10-CM Tabular, R codes.
EXERCISE 2-4
ICD-10-CM Index and Tabular
Using the information previously presented, answer the following:
1 
The code range for Mental, Behavioral and Neurodevelopmental
Disorders is ___________________.
a 
V00-Y99
b 
O00-O9A
c 
F01-F99
d 
N00-N99
2 
The code range for Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal
Period is ___________________.
a 
P00-P96
b 
Z00-Z99
c 
I00-I99
d 
G00-G99
3 
According to 
Fig. 2-10
, when referencing “Aberrant (congenital),
artery, eye” in the Index of the I-10, the coder is directed to
reference this code in the Tabular. ___________________
a 
Q98.0
b 
Q15.8
c 
R15
d 
Z49.31
4 
In the Index of the I-10, the main term is identified in this typeface.
___________________
a 
italic
b 
red
c 
underlined
d 
bold
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter format. 
Fig. 2-14
 indicates the format of each chapter.
 
FIGURE 2–14
ICD-10-CM Chapter Format.
Section. 
A section is a group of three-digit categories that represent a group of
conditions or related conditions.
Category. 
A three-character category is a code that represents a single condition
or disease.
Subcategory. 
A four-character subcategory code provides more information or
specificity as compared to the three-character code in terms of the
cause, site, or manifestation of the condition.
Subclassification. 
A five to seven-character subclassification code adds even more
information and specificity to a conditions description. You must
assign the additional characters if they are available.
Bold type
Bold type is used for all codes and titles in the Tabular List.
Example Box
E03.8 Other specified hypothyroidism
Italicized type
Italicized type is used for all exclusion notes and to identify those
codes that are not usually sequenced as the first-listed diagnosis.
Italicized type codes cannot be assigned as a first-listed diagnosis
because they always follow another code. Italicized codes are to be
sequenced according to specific coding instructions in the Tabular
List, such as “Code first . . . ” 
Fig. 2-15
 shows an example of italicized
type.
 
FIGURE 2–15
Italicized type in the Tabular List.
Official instructional notations in the
ICD-10-CM
The I-10 has instructional notations to provide guidance to the coder.
Although publishers will enhance their I-10s with various notations
and symbols, all publishers present the notations that are part of the
official version of the coding system. Let’s review these official
instructional notations.
Conventions
The ICD-10-CM manual contains a list of the conventions and
definitions to be used when assigning codes, usually in the front
matter of the manual. It is important that you be familiar with the
conventions as you prepare to assign ICD-10-CM codes.
Although the maintenance of the ICD-10-CM is the responsibility of
the NCHS (National Center for Health Statistics) and CMS (Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services), many private companies
publish editions of the ICD-10-CM, and each publisher has its own
conventions in addition to the standard conventions. For example,
some publishers indicate that an additional character is required by
placing a special symbol next to the code in the Alphabetic Index.
Additional symbols are helpful to coders but are not a recognized
convention.
The two main abbreviations NEC (not elsewhere classifiable) and
NOS (not otherwise specified) are often used and very important.
NEC. 
NEC is used in both the Alphabetic Index and the Tabular List. In the
Alphabetic Index, NEC represents “other specified.” When a specific
code is not available for a condition, the Alphabetic Index directs the
coder to the “other specified” code in the Tabular List.
The NEC abbreviation in the Tabular List also means “other
specified.” The code may not fully describe the disease process or
medical condition.
NEC can be used in two ways:
1. 
NEC directs the coder to other classifications, if appropriate. Other
subterms or Excludes notes may provide hints as to what the other
classifications may be.
2. 
NEC is used when the ICD-10-CM does not have any codes that
provide greater specificity.
NOS. 
NOS (not otherwise specified) is the equivalent of “unspecified.” It is
used when the information at hand does not permit a more specific
code assignment (
Fig. 2-16
). The coder should query the physician for
more specific information so that a more specific code assignment can
be made.
 
CODING SHOT
Third-party payers prefer specific codes and do not appreciate a
coder’s dependence on NOS codes. If the NOS code is the only correct
code, you must assign it, but only after a thorough review of all
available documentation.
 
FIGURE 2–16
NOS in the Tabular List.
Brackets [ ] 
Brackets enclose synonyms, alternative wording, or explanatory
phrases and are found in the Tabular List (
Fig. 2-17
). In the Alphabetic
Index, brackets are used to identify manifestation codes.
 
FIGURE 2–17
Brackets in the Tabular List.
Parentheses ( ) 
Parentheses enclose supplementary words (nonessential modifiers)
that may be present or absent in the statement of a disease or
procedure without affecting code assignment. Parentheses are located
in both the Alphabetic Index and the Tabular List.
Nonessential modifiers. 
Nonessential modifiers are words that may be used to clarify the
diagnosis but do not affect code assignment (
Fig. 2-18
). The code for
ileus is K56.7, and the code for inhibitory ileus is also K56.7. The
addition of the modifier “inhibitory” does not affect the code
assignment.
 
FIGURE 2–18
Parentheses in the Alphabetic Index.
EXERCISE 2-5
Essential/Nonessential Modifier
Using the ICD-10-CM Alphabetic Index, locate the following main terms
and identify if the bolded subterm is an essential or nonessential modifier:
1 
Otitis 
externa
 ____________________
2 
Acute
 otitis externa ____________________
3 
Streptococcal
 nasopharyngitis ____________________
4 
Subacute
 mastitis ____________________
5 
Congenital
 spondylolisthesis ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Colon : 
Colons are located in the Tabular List after an incomplete term that
needs one or more of the modifiers that follow in order to make the
condition assignable to a given category.
And and with. 
Although the two words “and” and “with” have similar meanings in
everyday language, in ICD-10-CM terminology they have special
significance and meanings. “And” means and/or, whereas “with”
indicates that two conditions are included in the code and both
conditions must be present to report the code.
And. 
In 
Fig. 2-19
, code J35 is assigned to identify the disease as one of
tonsils and/or adenoids.
 
FIGURE 2–19
“And” in the Tabular List.
With. 
In 
Fig. 2-20
, the “Diabetes” entry in the Index illustrates the use of
“with” to direct the coder to the correct codes and the sequence of
codes for conditions that may be present with the diabetes.
 
FIGURE 2–20
“With” in the Alphabetic Index.
Includes
The word “Includes” appears under certain categories to further
define or give examples of the content of the category. For example,
Fig. 2-21
 illustrates an “Includes” in 
Chapter 1
 of the I-10.
 
FIGURE 2–21
Includes notation in I-10.
Excludes
The I-10 has two types of Excludes notes. Each note has a different
meaning.
Excludes1. 
An Excludes1 note is a pure excludes. It means “NOT CODED
HERE!” and indicates that the code excluded should 
not be assigned
at the same time as the code above the Excludes1 note. In 
Fig. 2-22
codes in 
Chapter 1
 are not to be reported with certain localized
infections (the first Excludes1).
 
FIGURE 2–22
Excludes1 notation in I-10.
An Excludes1 is used when two conditions cannot occur together,
such as a congenital form versus an acquired form of the same
condition.
Excludes2. 
An Excludes2 note represents “Not included here.” An Excludes2 note
indicates that the condition excluded is not part of the condition it is
excluded from and a patient may have both conditions at the same
time. When an Excludes2 note appears under a code, it is acceptable to
use both the code and the Excludes2 code together. For example, the
first Excludes2 note in 
Chapter 1
 indicates that the infectious and
parasitic disease does not include a carrier or suspected carrier of
infectious disease as shown in 
Fig. 2-23
 and it is possible for the
patient to have both conditions.
QUICK CHECK 2-3
 
According to 
Fig. 2-23
, 
Chapter 1
 Excludes 2, what is the code you
reference when reporting
1. 
infectious and parasitic diseases complicating pregnancy, childbirth
and the puerperium? ________________
2. 
influenza and other acute respiratory infections? ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
FIGURE 2–23
Excludes2 notation in I-10.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section I.A. 12. A. excludes1
An exception to the Excludes1 definition is the circumstance when
the two conditions are unrelated to each other. If it is not clear
whether the two conditions involving an Excludes1 note are related
or not, query the provider. For example, code F45.8, Other
somatoform disorders, has an Excludes1 note for “sleep related teeth
grinding (G47.63),” because “teeth grinding” is an inclusion term
under F45.8. Only one of these two codes should be assigned for teeth
grinding. However psychogenic dysmenorrhea is also an inclusion
term under F45.8, and a patient could have both this condition and
sleep related teeth grinding. In this case, the two conditions are
clearly unrelated to each other, and so it would be appropriate to
report F45.8 and G47.63 together.
Code first/use additional code
The “Code first” and “Use additional code” notations indicate
etiology/manifestation paired codes. Certain conditions have both an
underlying etiology and multiple body system manifestations. For
such conditions, the I-10 has a coding convention that requires the
underlying condition be sequenced first followed by the
manifestation. Wherever such a combination exists there is a “Use
additional code” note at the 
etiology
 code, and a “Code first” note at
the 
manifestation
 code. These instructional notes indicate the proper
sequencing order of the codes—etiology followed by manifestation.
For example, as illustrated in 
Fig. 2-24
, the Code first notation at code
A40 directs the coder to report certain conditions first.
 
FIGURE 2–24
I-10 Tabular, Code first notation.
In most cases the manifestation codes will have in the code title, “in
diseases classified elsewhere.” Codes with this title are a component
of the etiology/manifestation convention. The code title “in diseases
classified elsewhere” indicates that the code is a manifestation code.
“In diseases classified elsewhere” codes are never first-listed codes.
Rather, these codes must be used in conjunction with an underlying
condition code and must follow the underlying condition code. For
example, the Code first notation at D77 directs the coder to first report
the underlying disease, such as illustrated in 
Fig. 2-25
. The black half-
moon symbol to the left of D77 in 
Fig. 2-25
 indicates a “Manifestation
Code.” (The black half-moon symbol is an enhancement placed by the
publisher and is not part of the official code set.)
 
FIGURE 2–25
ICD-10-CM Tabular, Code first underlying disease
notation.
Code also
A “Code also” note instructs that two codes may be required to fully
describe a condition but the sequencing of the two codes is
discretionary, depending on the severity of the conditions and the
reason for the encounter. For example, at D61.82, the coder is directed
to also code an underlying disorder, if one is present, as shown in 
Fig.
2-26
.
 
FIGURE 2–26
I-10 Tabular, Code also notation.
Default codes
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section I.A. 18. default codes
A code listed next to a main term in the ICD-10-CM Alphabetic Index
is referred to as a default code. The default code represents that
condition that is most commonly associated with the main term, or is
the unspecified code for the condition. If a condition is documented
in a medical record (for example, appendicitis) without any
additional information, such as acute or chronic, the default code
should be assigned.
Code assignment and clinical criteria
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section I.A. 19. code assignment and clinical criteria
The assignment of a diagnosis code is based on the provider’s
diagnostic statement that the condition exists. The provider’s
statement that the patient has a particular condition is sufficient.
Code assignment is not based on clinical criteria used by the provider
to establish the diagnosis.
7th characters and placeholder X
For codes less than 6 characters that require a 7th character a
placeholder X is assigned for all characters less than 6.
For the initial encounter of a sprain of an unspecified
acromioclavicular joint, the correct code, as shown in 
Fig. 2-27
, is
S43.50. Following the instructions under Category S43, a 7th character
A is required. In order for the A to be a 7th character, an X is added as
a 6th character to S43.50. The correct code is S43.50XA. In other cases,
the classification itself presents an X to identify a placeholder that may
be expanded in the future. For example, see 
Fig. 2-28
. In this case, the
classification may in the future be divided into individual disorders of
the patella for more specific coding. The 7th character now and in the
future will identify whether the disorder is of the right or left knee.
EXERCISE 2-6
Official Instructional I-10 Notations
With the use of the information previously presented, match the
following notation with the correct description:
1 
Includes
______________
2 
Excludes1
____________
3 
Excludes2
____________
4 
Code First
____________
5 
Code Also
____________
a. 
two codes may be required to fully describe the condition but the sequencing of the two codes is
discretionary
b. 
pure excludes
c. 
indicates a manifestation due to underlying etiology
d. 
not included here
e. 
gives further definition or examples of content
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
FIGURE 2–27
Determining X as the placeholder.
 
FIGURE 2–28
X as the placeholder.
Cross-references
Cross-references provide the coder with possible alternatives or
synonyms for a term. There are three types of cross-references:
1. 
see
2. 
see
 also
3. 
see
 category
The “
see
” cross-reference is an explicit direction to look elsewhere.
It is used for anatomic sites and many modifiers not normally used in
the Alphabetic Index. The “see” cross-reference is also used to
reference the appropriate main term under which all the information
concerning a specific disease will be located.
Example
Encephalomeningitis–
see
 Meningoencephalitis
Kidney–
see
 condition
Lipofibroma–
see
 Lipoma
The “
see also
” cross-reference directs the coder to reference another
main term if all the information being searched for cannot be located
under the first main term entry.
Example
Lax, laxity–
see also
 Relaxation
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 2, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What department in the United States is responsible for the
developing the procedure classification entitled the ICD-10-PCS
(Procedure Coding System)? ________________
2 ICD-10-CM was developed by what group to replace ICD-9-CM?
________________
3 In ICD-10-CM the expansion of the injury codes allows for what
improvement? ________________
4 When two conditions cannot occur together, such as a congenital
form versus an acquired form of the same condition, what note is used
in ICD-10-CM? ________________
5 ICD-10-PCS is used primarily by what group? ________________
Chapter 2, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, answer the following:
1 I-10 codes are alphanumeric.
True   False
2 I-10 is indexed in a similar manner to ICD-9-CM.
True   False
3 Like I-9, I-10 contains 17 chapters.
True   False
4 All versions of the ICD-10-CM are based on the official government
version.
True   False
5 I-10 was issued in 1993 by ________________.
a CMS
b AHIMA
c AHA
d WHO
6 The acronym used in the United States for the I-10 system that
reports inpatient procedures is the ________________.
a PDQ
b PCS
c PHI
d none of the above
7 The expansion of the injury codes in the I-10 has been done with
________________ codes.
a sport
b ambulatory
c activity
d dynamic
8 The mapping files that crosswalk I-9 to I-10 and I-10 to I-9 are
known as ________________.
a ACTs
b GEMs
c HIMs
d PQIs
9 A code that reports more than one diagnosis with one code is a
________________ code.
a multiple
b compound
c complex
d combination
Chapter 2, part II, practical
GEMs FILES REQUIRED. 
Using the I-9 to I-10 GEMs file, map the
following codes. The I-9 codes may have more than one correct I-10 code.
10 004.0 ____________________
11 456.1 _____________________
12 803. 81 __________________
13 290.40 ____________________
14 530.0 _______________________
a K22.0
b I85.00
c S06.360A
d A03.0
e F01.50
f S02.91XB
GEMs FILES REQUIRED. 
Using the I-10 to I-9 GEMs file, map the
following codes and drag and drop the I-9 code or codes to the correct I-10
code.
15 R56.9
16 S52.513S
17 Z99.89
18 W16.832S
19 V04.99XS
a 905.2
b E929.0
c V46.8
d E929.3
e 780.39
Using the Tabular List, answer the following questions.
20 Is acute lymphoblastic leukemia in remission assigned C91.00?
_________________
If not, what code is assigned?
_______________________________________________
21 Is congenital hydronephrosis assigned code N13.30?
__________________________
If not, what code is assigned?
_______________________________________________
Using the Tabular and instructional notes, assign and sequence the
following code(s) (Separate multiple codes with a comma and then a space in
your response. XXX.XX, XXX.XX):
22 See category G30 and assign code(s) for a patient who has
Alzheimer’s disease with behavioral disturbances.
________________________________________________________________________
23 See category E11 and assign code(s) for a patient with Type 2
diabetes without complications, with insulin use.
________________________________________________________________________
24 See category N18 and assign code(s) for a patient with hypertensive
stage 5 chronic kidney disease.
________________________________________________________________________
Identify the main terms to be located in the Alphabetic Index in the
following diagnostic statements:
25 Normocytic anemia _________________
26 Acute prostatitis _________________
27 Severe protein calorie malnutrition _________________
28 Granuloma lung _________________
29 Pain in neck _________________
Using the Tabular List, answer the following questions:
30 Is nephrogenic diabetes insipidus assigned code E23.2?
________________________
If not, what code is assigned?
_______________________________________________
31 Is rupture of the esophagus assigned code K22.3?
________________________
If not, what code is assigned?
_______________________________________________
32 Is congenital clubfoot assigned code M21.549?
________________________
If not, what code is assigned?
_______________________________________________
33 Is Shy-Drager syndrome assigned code G23.8?
________________________
If not, what code is assigned?
_______________________________________________
34 Is duodenal ulcer included in code category K27?
________________________
If not, what code is assigned?
_______________________________________________
Match the convention to the definition:
35 
see
 category
36 Notes
37 
see
 also
38 modifiers
39 
see
40 subterm
41 with
a terms in parentheses or following main terms;
they may or may not be essential
b indicates two conditions are included in the
code
c directs coder to use Tabular List for additional
information
d defines and gives instructions
e directs coder to look under another term if all
information is not located under the first
term
f terms indented under main terms, considered
essential modifiers
g explicit direction to look elsewhere
Using the Alphabetic Index, answer the following questions:
42 Locate the main term “Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome” in
the Index. Is there another term for acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome that may be located in the Index? _____________ If so, what
is the term? _______________
43 Locate the main term “Itch” in the Index. Is there another term for
itch that may be located in the Index? ______________ If so, what is
the term? _______________
44 Locate the main term “Polyadenitis” in the Index. Is there another
term for polyadenitis that may be located in the Index? ___________ If
so, what is the term? _____________
45 Locate the main term “Polypoid” in the Index, and identify the
cross reference given.
___________________________________________________________________
46 Locate the main term “Morbilli” in the Index, and identify the cross
reference given.
________________________________________________________________________
47 Locate the main term “Hyperthermia” in the Index. Is there another
term for hyperthermia that may be located in the Index? ____________
If so, what is the term? _____________
48 Locate the main term “Hypertensive urgency” in the Index, and
identify the cross reference given.
________________________________________________________________________
49 Locate the main term “Hypogenitalism” in the Index, and identify
the cross reference given.
________________________________________________________________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 3
ICD-10-CM outpatient coding
and reporting guidelines
 
“ICD-10-CM requires a shift for providers in their documentation
habits. More specific information is required to accurately report
conditions. I think it would be beneficial for coders to be proactive in
working with their providers to coach them in more thorough
documentation.”
Joan E. Wolfgang, MEd, RHIT, CPC, COC, CPC-I, CCA
Faculty
 
Milwaukee Area Technical College
 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
CHAPTER TOPICS
First-Listed Diagnosis​
Unconfirmed Diagnosis​
Outpatient Surgery​
Additional Diagnoses​
Z Codes​
Observation Stay​
First-Listed Diagnosis and Coexisting Conditions​
Uncertain Diagnosis​
Chronic Diseases​
Documented Conditions​
Diagnostic Services​
Therapeutic Services​
Preoperative Evaluation​
Prenatal Visits​
Chapter Review​
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Identify a first-listed diagnosis.
2 
Define assignment of codes for unconfirmed diagnosis.
3 
Describe code assignment for outpatient surgery.
4 
Outline assignment of additional diagnoses.
5 
Describe Z code reporting.
6 
Define observation stay.
7 
Delineate the differences between first-listed and coexisting
conditions.
8 
Explain uncertain diagnosis.
9 
Understand assignment of codes for chronic diseases.
10 
Recognize diagnostic services.
11 
Recognize therapeutic services.
12 
Illustrate reporting of preoperative evaluations.
13 
Explain prenatal visits.
14 
Apply the 
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
First-listed diagnosis
The majority of the services that a physician will provide are
outpatient services, so this chapter will start with assigning I-10
diagnosis codes for outpatient services in accordance with the I-10
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
, Section IV.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.
Diagnostic coding and reporting guidelines for outpatient
services
These coding guidelines for outpatient diagnoses have been
approved for use by hospitals/providers in coding and reporting
hospital-based outpatient services and provider-based office visits.
Guidelines in Section I, Conventions, general coding guidelines
and chapter-specific guidelines, should also be applied for
outpatient services and office visits.
Information about the use of certain abbreviations, punctuation,
symbols, and other conventions used in the ICD-10-CM Tabular List
(code numbers and titles), can be found in Section IA of these
guidelines, under “Conventions Used in the Tabular List.” Section I.
B. contains general guidelines that apply to the entire classification.
Section I. C. contains chapter-specific guidelines that correspond to
the chapters as they are arranged in the classification. Information
about the correct sequence to use in finding a code is also described in
Section I.
The terms encounter and visit are often used interchangeably in
describing outpatient service contacts and, therefore, appear together
in these guidelines without distinguishing one from the other.
Though the conventions and general guidelines apply to all
settings, coding guidelines for outpatient and provider reporting of
diagnoses will vary in a number of instances from those for inpatient
diagnoses, recognizing that:
The Uniform Hospital Discharge Data Set (UHDDS) definition of
principal diagnosis 
does not apply to hospital-based outpatient
services and provider-based office visits.
Coding guidelines for inconclusive diagnoses (probable, suspected,
rule out, etc.) were developed for inpatient reporting and do not
apply to outpatients.
A. 
Selection of first-listed condition
In the outpatient setting, the term first-listed
diagnosis is used in lieu of principal diagnosis.
In determining the first-listed diagnosis the
coding conventions of ICD-10-CM, as well as
the general and disease specific guidelines take
precedence over the outpatient guidelines.
Diagnoses often are not established at the time of
the initial encounter/visit. It may take two or
more visits before the diagnosis is confirmed.
The most critical rule involves beginning the
search for the correct code assignment through
the Alphabetic Index. Never begin searching
initially in the Tabular List as this will lead to
coding errors.
Examples
Select the first-listed diagnosis
Established 50-year-old patient was seen in the clinic for acute
bronchitis. Patient also received a prescription for a refill of
medication for hypertension. The first-listed diagnosis is acute
bronchitis.
Initial office visit for a 36-year-old female complaining of irregular
menses. Review of systems identified unexplained weight loss. The
first-listed diagnosis is irregular menses.
Established patient is a 75-year-old male complaining of substernal
chest pain, which is relieved with rest. Patient has hypertension and
blood pressure is above baseline on this visit. The first-listed
diagnosis is substernal chest pain.
EXERCISE 3-1
First-Listed Diagnosis
Identify the first-listed diagnosis in the following encounters or
visits:
1 
Established patient complaining of painful urination and frequency.
Patient is a type 2 diabetic. Lab work revealed a urinary tract
infection and blood glucose was within normal limits.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
2 
Established patient presented to clinic with exacerbation of Crohn’s
disease. Patient’s rheumatoid arthritis is stable and no medication
changes were made.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
3 
Initial office visit for sprained left knee. Patient has a history of
hypertension and asthma, both stable at this time.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
4 
Initial office visit for patient requiring equal management of COPD
and CHF.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
5 
Established patient seen for cough, fever, and shortness of breath.
Chest x-ray confirmed physician’s diagnosis of pneumonia and
patient was sent home on antibiotics.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Most physicians will document the “chief complaint” of the patient
for each encounter in the medical record. The chief complaint (CC) is
the reason the patient presents for the medical visit. The CC is one of
the keys to determining the first-listed diagnosis. The chief complaint
is the reason for the visit from the patient’s perspective. For example,
a patient consumed a soup that contained shellfish. The patient is
allergic to shellfish, and develops hives. The chief complaint and the
first-listed diagnosis is allergic hives, due to allergy to shellfish:
L50.0
Allergic urticaria
Z91.013
Allergy to seafood
Other times, the patient’s complaint is a symptom of a more
complex diagnosis. For example, a patient presents with a chief
complaint of a backache, and after examination, the physician
determines the patient has an acute kidney infection due to 
Escherichia
coli
. The chief complaint is a backache, but the first-listed diagnosis is
an acute kidney infection due to 
E. coli
. The backache was a symptom
of the acute kidney infection.
N10
Acute pyelonephritis
B96.2
Escherichia coli [E. coli] as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
The patient may also schedule a visit without a chief complaint. As
examples, the patient requests a physical to qualify for insurance or
may be an expectant parent seeking to establish a pediatrician. The
reason for these visits can be reported as first-listed codes using codes
from 
Chapter 21
:
Z02.6
Encounter for examination for insurance purposes
Z76.81
Expectant parent(s) prebirth pediatrician visit
Unconfirmed diagnosis
Often, it may take several encounters before the diagnosis is
confirmed. In these instances, report the symptoms or signs that
occasioned the encounter.
Examples
Two or more visits before a diagnosis is confirmed
1. 
Initial office visit, 30-year-old woman complains of fatigue,
abnormal weight gain, and constipation. Lab studies including
thyroid function test were ordered. Patient will return in two weeks.
In this case the only reportable diagnoses are
symptom codes as no specific diagnosis has
been confirmed during this visit.
Codes: R53.83 fatigue, R63.5 abnormal weight
gain, and K59.00 constipation.
2. 
Follow-up office visit, 30-year-old woman with continued
complaints of fatigue, weight gain, and constipation. Lab results
confirm that patient has hypothyroidism and she was started on
Synthroid. She will have repeat thyroid function studies on her next
visit.
Code: E03.9 hypothyroidism. The patient was told
that she has hypothyroidism and the fatigue,
weight gain, and constipation are common
symptoms and would likely improve with
treatment of her hypothyroidism. No additional
treatment was directed at the patient’s
symptoms.
3. 
Follow-up office visit, 30-year-old woman is seen following her
repeat thyroid function studies and her hypothyroidism has
responded to the Synthroid. She will be maintained on her current
dose.
Code: E03.9 hypothyroidism is the reason for the
visit.
EXERCISE 3-2
Unconfirmed Diagnosis
Using reference material, assign codes to the following:
1 
Initial office visit for a 28-year-old male with persistent abdominal
pain and bloody diarrhea. Patient was scheduled for small-bowel x-
rays and colonoscopy and will be seen in the office following those
outpatient procedures.
Codes: ________________, ________________
2 
Follow-up office visit for a 28-year-old male with recent colonoscopy
with biopsy and small bowel x-rays. The biopsy and small bowel x-
rays confirmed that the patient had ulcerative colitis and the patient
was started on sulfasalazine.
Code: ________________
3 
Initial office visit for 55-year-old male with fatigue and jaundice.
Laboratory tests were ordered and patient will return in 1 week for
the results.
Codes: ________________, ________________
4 
Follow-up office visit for 55-year-old male with jaundice and fatigue.
Diagnostic tests confirm that the patient has hepatitis C. He will be
treated with interferon therapy.
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Outpatient surgery
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.A. 1.
Outpatient surgery
When a patient presents for outpatient surgery (same day surgery),
code the reason for the surgery as the first-listed diagnosis (reason for
the encounter), even if the surgery is not performed due to a
contraindication.
Examples
Outpatient surgery
Patient with a history of asthma presents for an outpatient T&A due
to chronic tonsillitis.
First-listed diagnosis: J35.01 Chronic tonsillitis.
Outpatient surgery that has been canceled
Patient presented for a right inguinal hernia repair. Following
assessment of the patient by the nurse, it was discovered that the
patient had breakfast and the surgery was canceled and will be
rescheduled for next week.
First-listed diagnosis: K40.90 Inguinal hernia, followed by Z53.09
(procedure not carried out due to other contraindication).
EXERCISE 3-3
Outpatient Surgery
Identify the first-listed diagnosis in the following:
1 
A female patient was admitted as an outpatient for elective bilateral
tubal ligation. The patient was noted to be wheezing during the
nurse’s assessment. She was seen by her physician and her surgery
was canceled because of an exacerbation of her asthma.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________
2 
A male patient was admitted as an outpatient for transurethral
prostatic resection for symptomatic benign prostatic hypertrophy.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________
3 
A patient was admitted as an outpatient for a cystoscopy for
hematuria. The procedure was performed without complications.
No abnormality or explanation for the hematuria was found.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________
(Answers are located in
Appendix B
)
Additional diagnoses
In the preceding guidelines and exercises, we were concerned
primarily with the identification of the first-listed diagnosis. In some
cases, additional diagnoses would be reported to describe
complications, reasons for canceled procedures, and other coexisting
conditions.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.B.
Codes from a00.0 through t88.9, Z00-Z99
The appropriate code(s) from A00.0 through T88.9, Z00-Z99 must be
used to identify diagnoses, symptoms, conditions, problems,
complaints, or other reason(s) for the encounter/visit.
The Guidelines state that it is acceptable to use any of the codes
throughout the entire Tabular List to identify the reason(s) for an
outpatient visit including the use of Z codes. Z codes are used more
frequently in the outpatient setting.
This guideline assures data integrity by promoting accurate I-10
diagnosis codes that are supported by documentation in the health
record. It is important to code all the conditions or problems that are
being managed during an encounter.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.C.
Accurate reporting of ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes
For accurate reporting of ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes, the
documentation should describe the patient’s condition, using
terminology which includes specific diagnoses as well as symptoms,
problems, or reasons for the encounter. There are ICD-10-CM codes
to describe all of these.
According to Guideline D, it is acceptable for symptoms and signs
to be reported if no definitive diagnosis has been established by the
provider. 
Chapter 18
 of the I-10 contains codes (R00-R99) for most of
these symptom or sign codes, but there are other such codes
throughout the I-10.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.D.
Codes that describe symptoms and signs
Codes that describe symptoms and signs, as opposed to diagnoses,
are acceptable for reporting purposes when a diagnosis has not been
established (confirmed) by the provider. 
Chapter 18
 of ICD-10-CM,
Symptoms, Signs, and Abnormal Clinical and Laboratory Findings
Not Elsewhere Classified (codes R00-R99) contain many, but not all
codes for symptoms.
Z codes
There are 21 chapters in Volume 1, Tabular List, of the I-10. Each of
the chapters represents a different organ system or type of disease.
You will review each of the chapters, but first, there are some special
codes that you need to know about—Z codes (located in 
Chapter 21
 of
the I-10).
When abstracting information from the medical record as the basis
for code assignment, the intent is to communicate the story of the
patient encounter. Sometimes, important information contributing to
the care of the patient is not an illness. As you read through the
medical record, always ask yourself, “Is this information pertinent to
the care provided?” For example, the patient may have a history of
cancer, but the cancer has been surgically removed. As another
example, a patient lives in difficult circumstances at his home and
these circumstances are affecting the patient’s health or are affecting
the physician’s ability to treat the patient’s primary condition, putting
the patient at risk. There are also circumstances in which patients need
counseling or may have been exposed to a disease that they may or
may not have contracted. The Z codes are assigned to report these
types of encounters and capture the story accurately. Sometimes the Z
code will be the first-listed code, and sometimes the Z code will be a
supplemental code. 
Read the following Guidelines about assignment
of codes in the Z00-Z99 range:
Examples
1. 
The patient complains to her family practitioner of blood in her
sputum. An x-ray shows a coin lesion in the right lung. The patient
is seven years post-mastectomy for breast cancer.
The history of breast cancer is pertinent to the
patient’s chief complaint. Although the patient
has been symptom-free for seven years, her
history of breast cancer will contribute to the
diagnostic path the physician chooses. Report:
R04.2
Hemoptysis
R91.1
Other coin lesion lung
Z85.3
Personal history of malignant neoplasm of breast
2. 
John went camping last month in the Rockies with several friends
who now have been diagnosed with Giardia from drinking from the
mountain stream. John also drank from the stream but has no
symptoms. He presents to the office today to be tested for Giardia.
The laboratory results indicate that he has been infected with
Giardia lamblia
 and is prescribed a 10-day course of Flagyl.
John did not have a chief complaint and had no
symptoms. He presented for a screening test
and laboratory results indicated an infection.
Report:
Z11.0
Encounter for screening for intestinal Infectious diseases
A07.1
Giardiasis [lambliasis]
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.E.
Encounters for circumstances other than a disease or injury
ICD-10-CM provides codes to deal with encounters for circumstances
other than a disease or injury. The Factors Influencing Health Status
and Contact with Health Services codes (Z00-Z99) are provided to
deal with occasions when circumstances other than a disease or injury
are recorded as diagnosis or problems.
See
 
Section I.C.21
. Factors influencing health status and contact with
health services.
SECTION IV.Q. Encounters for routine health screenings
See
 
Section I.C.21
. Factors influencing health status and contact with health
services, Screening
SECTION I.C.21. 
Chapter 21
: factors influencing health
status and contact with health services (Z00-Z99)
Note:
 The chapter specific guidelines provide additional
information about the use of Z codes for specified encounters.
a. 
Use of Z codes in any healthcare setting
Z codes are for use in any healthcare setting. Z
codes may be used as either a first-listed
(principal diagnosis code in the inpatient
setting) or secondary code, depending on the
circumstances of the encounter. Certain Z codes
may only be used as first-listed or principal
diagnosis.
b. 
Z Codes indicate a reason for an encounter
Z codes are not procedure codes. A corresponding
procedure code must accompany a Z code to
describe any procedure performed.
c. 
Categories of Z Codes
1) 
Contact/Exposure
Category Z20 indicates contact with, and
suspected exposure to, communicable diseases.
These codes are for patients who do not show
any sign or symptom of a disease but are
suspected to have been exposed to it by close
personal contact with an infected individual or
are in an area where a disease is epidemic.
Category Z77, Other contact with and (suspected)
exposures hazardous to health.
Contact/exposure codes may be used as a first-
listed code to explain an encounter for testing,
or, more commonly, as a secondary code to
identify a potential risk.
2) 
Inoculations and vaccinations
Code Z23 is for encounters for inoculations and
vaccinations. It indicates that a patient is being
seen to receive a prophylactic inoculation
against a disease. Procedure codes are required
to identify the actual administration of the
injection and the type(s) of immunizations
given. Code Z23 may be used as a secondary
code if the inoculation is given as a routine part
of preventive health care, such as a well-baby
visit.
 
QUICK CHECK 3-1
1. 
According to the Guidelines, which category code would you
reference to report inoculations and vaccinations?
________________
2. 
According to the Guidelines, this category is referenced when
reporting suspected exposure to a communicable disease:
________________
3. 
Can Z codes only be used in the outpatient setting?
Yes   No
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Status code
A status code is assigned to indicate that a patient has a sequelae or
residual of a past disease or condition or is a current carrier of a
disease. There are codes and categories of Z codes assigned to report a
status.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.21. 3)
Status
Status codes indicate that a patient is either a carrier of a disease or
has the sequelae or residual of a past disease or condition. This
includes such things as the presence of prosthetic or mechanical
devices resulting from past treatment. A status code is informative,
because the status may affect the course of treatment and its outcome.
A status code is distinct from a history code. The history code
indicates that the patient no longer has the condition.
A status code should not be used with a diagnosis code from one of
the body system chapters, if the diagnosis code includes the
information provided by the status code. For example, code Z94.1,
Heart transplant status, should not be used with a code from
subcategory T86.2, Complications of heart transplant. The status code
does not provide additional information. The complication code
indicates that the patient is a heart transplant patient.
For encounters for weaning from a mechanical ventilator, assign a
code from 
subcategory
 J96.1, Chronic respiratory failure, followed by
code Z99.11, Dependence on respirator [ventilator] status.
The status Z codes/categories are:
Z14
Genetic carrier
Genetic carrier status indicates that a person carries a gene, associated with a particular disease, which may be passed
to offspring who may develop that disease. The person does not have the disease and is not at risk of developing the
disease.
Z15
Genetic susceptibility to disease
Genetic susceptibility indicates that a person has a gene that increases the risk of that person developing the disease.
Codes from category Z15 should not be used as principal or first-listed codes. If the patient has the condition to which
he/she is susceptible, and that condition is the reason for the encounter, the code for the current condition should be
sequenced first. If the patient is being seen for follow-up after completed treatment for this condition, and the
condition no longer exists, a follow-up code should be sequenced first, followed by the appropriate personal history
and genetic susceptibility codes. If the purpose of the encounter is genetic counseling associated with procreative
management, code Z31.5, Encounter for genetic counseling, should be assigned as the first-listed code, followed by a
code from category Z15. Additional codes should be assigned for any applicable family or personal history.
Z16
Resistance to antimicrobial drugs
This code indicates that a patient has a condition that is resistant to antimicrobial drug treatment. Sequence the
infection code first.
Z17
Estrogen receptor status
Z18
Retained foreign body fragments
Z19
Hormone sensitivity malignancy status
Z21
Asymptomatic HIV infection status
This code indicates that a patient has tested positive for HIV but has manifested no signs or symptoms of the disease.
Z22
Carrier of infectious disease
Carrier status indicates that a person harbors the specific organisms of a disease without manifest symptoms and is
capable of transmitting the infection.
Z28.3
Underimmunization status
Z33.1
Pregnant state, incidental
This code is a secondary code only for use when the pregnancy is in no way complicating the reason for visit.
Otherwise, a code from the obstetric chapter is required.
Z66
Do not resuscitate
This code may be used when it is documented by the provider that a patient is on do not resuscitate status at any time
during the stay.
Z67
Blood type
Z68
Body mass index (BMI)
As with all other secondary diagnosis codes, the BMI codes should only be assigned when they meet the definition of a
reportable diagnosis (see Section III, Reporting Additional Diagnoses).
Z74.01
Bed confinement status
Z76.82
Awaiting organ transplant status
Z78
Other specified health status
Code Z78.1, Physical restraint status, may be used when it is documented by the provider that a patient has been put
in restraints during the current encounter. Please note that this code should not be reported when it is documented by
the provider that a patient is temporarily restrained during a procedure.
Z79
Long-term (current) drug therapy
Codes from this category indicate a patient’s continuous use of a prescribed drug (including such things as aspirin
therapy) for the long-term treatment of a condition or for prophylactic use. It is not for use for patients who have
addictions to drugs. This subcategory is not for use of medications for detoxification or maintenance programs to
prevent withdrawal symptoms in patients with drug dependence (e.g., methadone maintenance for opiate
dependence). Assign the appropriate code for the drug dependence instead.
Assign a code from Z79 if the patient is receiving a medication for an extended period as a prophylactic measure (such
as for the prevention of deep vein thrombosis) or as treatment of a chronic condition (such as arthritis) or a disease
requiring a lengthy course of treatment (such as cancer). Do not assign a code from category Z79 for medication being
administered for a brief period of time to treat an acute illness or injury (such as a course of antibiotics to treat acute
bronchitis).
Z88
Allergy status to drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Except: Z88.9, Allergy status to unspecified drugs, medicaments and biological substances status
Z89
Acquired absence of limb
Z90
Acquired absence of organs, not elsewhere classified
Z91.0-
Allergy status, other than to drugs and biological substances
Z92.82
Status post administration of tPA (rtPA) in a different facility within the last 24 hours prior to admission to current
facility
Assign code Z92.82, Status post administration of tPA (rtPA) in a different facility within the last 24 hours prior to
admission to current facility, as a secondary diagnosis when a patient is received by transfer into a facility and
documentation indicates they were administered tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) within the last 24 hours prior to
admission to the current facility.
This guideline applies even if the patient is still receiving the tPA at the time they are received into the current facility.
The appropriate code for the condition for which the tPA was administered (such as cerebrovascular disease or
myocardial infarction) should be assigned first.
Code Z92.82 is only applicable to the receiving facility record and not to the transferring facility record.
Z93
Artificial opening status
Z94
Transplanted organ and tissue status
Z95
Presence of cardiac and vascular implants and grafts
Z96
Presence of other functional implants
Z97
Presence of other devices
Z98
Other postprocedural states
Assign code Z98.85, Transplanted organ removal status, to indicate that a transplanted organ has been previously
removed. This code should not be assigned for the encounter in which the transplanted organ is removed. The
complication necessitating removal of the transplant organ should be assigned for that encounter.
See section I.C19. for information on the coding of organ transplant complications.
Z99
Dependence on enabling machines and devices, not elsewhere classified
Note:
 Categories Z89-Z90 and Z93-Z99 are for use only if there are no complications or malfunctions of the organ or
tissue replaced, the amputation site or the equipment on which the patient is dependent.
External cause index
Chapter 20
 in the I-10 classifies External Causes. The External Cause
Index is located after the Table of Drugs and Chemicals in the I-10.
The index classifies environmental events (tornadoes, floods),
circumstances, and other conditions as the cause of injury and other
adverse effects alphabetically. 
The External Cause codes are never
reported as a first-listed diagnosis.
 Rather these codes are reported to
clarify injury or adverse effects.
The code terms describe the external circumstances under which an
accident, injury, or act of violence occurred. The main terms in the
code index usually represent the type of accident or violence (e.g.,
assault, collision), with the specific agent or other circumstance listed
below the main term. “Assault” in 
Fig. 3-1
 illustrates a main term and
indented subterms that further define how the assault occurred. You
will not find these codes in the Index to Disease of the I-10; rather you
must reference the External Cause Index.
 
FIGURE 3–1
External Cause Index of the I-10.
External cause codes have their own index, and the external cause
codes are not listed in the Index to Diseases. When an external cause
code is reported, it is reported 
in addition
 to an injury code from the
Tabular List of the I-10. The external cause codes are codes that
provide greater detail. Most groups of codes have Includes or
Excludes notes that provide further detail about assigning the codes.
Index locations
The Z codes are located at the end of the Tabular. If you have an I-10
manual available, locate the Z codes in the Tabular now. Z codes can
be located in the Index like any other code. Often, the most difficult
thing about the Z code is locating the Z code term in the Index. To
help you become familiar with how to locate Z codes in the Index,
review 
Fig. 3-2
 for the most common Index terms for locating Z codes.
EXERCISE 3-4
External Cause Codes
Using the I-10 manual, locate the correct External Cause code
indicated for each of the following:
1 
Railway accident involving derailment without antecedent collision,
injuring a porter
Place of occurrence code: ____________________
2 
Motor vehicle traffic accident due to tire blowout; driver of the car
was injured, initial encounter
Injured person code: ____________________
3 
Driver of an ATV (off-road vehicle) is injured when he collides with
a fence
Injured person code: ____________________
4 
Horse being ridden, rider injured, and non-motor vehicle collision,
initial encounter
Injured person code: ____________________
5 
Accident to watercraft causing other injury; occupant of small
powered boat injured due to collision, initial encounter
External cause code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
FIGURE 3–2
Most common Index terms for locating Z codes.
Circumstances to assign Z codes
Z codes are most often assigned in the outpatient settings, that is,
ambulatory care centers, physicians’ offices, and outpatient
departments of hospitals.
1. 
When a person who is currently not sick encounters the health
services for some specific purpose, such as to act as donor of an organ
or tissue, to receive a preventive vaccination, or to discuss a problem
that is in itself not a disease or injury. Occurrences such as these are
more common among outpatients at health clinics.
Example
The patient is donating a kidney.
Code:
Z52.4 indicates a donor of a kidney; the donor is not sick but encounters health care
You would first locate “Donor, kidney,” in the Index, and then
verify code Z52.4 in the Z codes of the Tabular List.
Example
A student seeks health care to discuss a problem with school
maladjustment with classmates.
Z55
Problems related to education and literacy
Z55.4 Educational maladjustment and discord with teachers and classmates
Z55 is the category code and Z55.4 is the subcategory code.
Code:         Z55.4 indicates a patient who is not ill but encounters health care for a psychosocial circumstance. The Index
location is “Dissatisfaction with, school environment.”
2. 
A patient with a known disease or injury receives health services for
specific treatment of the disease or injury.
Example
A female patient with breast cancer reports to the outpatient
department of the hospital for a chemotherapy session. The patient
receives health care services for treatment of cancer.
Index:
Chemotherapy,
 neoplasm Z51.11
Tabular:
Z51 Encounter for other aftercare
Z51.1 Encounter for antineoplastic chemotherapy and immunotherapy
Z51.11 Encounter for antineoplastic chemotherapy
Code:
Z51.11 Chemotherapy treatment
The breast cancer (C50.919) would also be reported, but you will
learn about the details of that later; for now, concentrate on the use of
the Z codes. Also, Z codes should not be mistaken for procedure
codes.
3. 
A circumstance or problem is present and influences a patient’s
health status but is not in itself a current illness or injury. (In these
situations the Z code should be used only as a supplementary or
secondary code.)
Example
A patient who is allergic to penicillin is admitted to the hospital for
treatment of pneumonia using intravenous antibiotics. The patient
receives treatment for the pneumonia, but the patient’s allergy to
penicillin is a special consideration in the treatment received.
Index:
History,
 personal (of), allergy to, penicillin Z88.0
Tabular:
Z88 Allergy status to drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Z88.0 Allergy status to penicillin
Code:
Z88.0, History of allergy to penicillin
Additionally, the pneumonia (J18.9) would be reported as the first-
listed diagnosis, but you are focusing only on the use of Z codes right
now.
4. 
To indicate the birth status and outcome of the delivery of a
newborn.
Example
A live, healthy newborn infant is the result of a vaginal delivery in
the hospital.
Index:
Infant(s)
, liveborn (singleton), born in hospital Z38.00
Tabular:
Z38.00 Single liveborn, delivered vaginally
The first “0” in Z38.00 reports born in hospital, and the last “0”
reports a vaginal delivery.
Code:
Z38.00 Vaginal delivery of a single, live-born newborn in the hospital
History of
Often, the patient record states that there is a “history of” a disease:
for example, “history of diabetes type 2 mellitus without
complications.” This does not mean that the patient no longer has
diabetes mellitus but that the patient’s medical history includes
diabetes mellitus. You would not assign a Z code to indicate a
previous history of diabetes mellitus but instead would assign the
code for the current disease of diabetes mellitus (E11.9). If there is any
question regarding the current status of the disease, check with the
physician. You may also want to offer some physician education
regarding the documentation of past history of diseases.
EXERCISE 3-5
Z Codes
Locate the Z codes in the I-10 manual in Volume 2, Alphabetic Index,
and then in Volume 1, Tabular List. Code the following:
1 
A person who has been in contact with smallpox
Index location:
_________________________________________________________
Code: ________________
2 
Prophylactic vaccination against smallpox
Index location:
_________________________________________________________
Code: ________________
3 
Personal history of malignant neoplasm of the lip
Index location:
_________________________________________________________
Code: ________________
Assign the Z code for the following:
4 
Admission for cardiac pacemaker adjustment
Code: ________________
5 
Initial prescription and insertion of subdermal implantable
contraceptive
Code: ________________
6 
Personal history of cancer of the prostate
Code: ________________
7 
Baby in for MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccination
Code: ________________
8 
Screening mammogram
Code: ________________
9 
Clinic visit for pre-employment physical examination
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Observation stay
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.A. 2.
Observation stay
When a patient is admitted for observation for a medical condition,
assign a code for the medical condition as the first-listed diagnosis.
When a patient presents for outpatient surgery and develops
complications requiring admission to observation, code the reason for
the surgery as the first reported diagnosis (reason for the encounter),
followed by codes for the complications as secondary diagnoses.
The two categories of Z codes that report observation are 
Z03
 and
Z04
. These observation codes are reported only as the first-listed
diagnosis for medical observation for suspected conditions and
conditions ruled out. Other codes may be reported in addition to the
observation codes but only when that condition or conditions are
unrelated to the reason for the observation. For example, a patient
admitted for observation for suspected exposure to anthrax (Z03.810)
demonstrates no signs or symptoms but is admitted to observation to
determine if the exposure will result in the patient developing
anthrax. If the patient also has primary hypertension (I10), the
hypertension may be reported as it is unrelated to the anthrax
exposure and observation.
 
QUICK CHECK 3-2
1. 
The I-10 code to report observation for suspected exposure to
anthrax, ruled out, is ________.
2. 
When reporting the diagnosis for a patient admitted to observation
status for a medical condition, assign a code for the ________
condition as the first-listed diagnosis.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Example
Observation for a medical condition
A patient was admitted for observation due to chest pain. The patient
has chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). After testing, no
evidence of cardiac cause was found. The patient was discharged
home. Discharge Diagnosis: Noncardiac chest pain.
First-listed diagnosis: R07.89 Noncardiac chest pain.
Codes P00-P04 report observation and evaluation of newborns for
suspected conditions that are not found. These codes are only
reported when a healthy newborn is evaluated for a condition that is
suspected, but after a study has determined the condition not to be
present. If the newborn has signs or symptoms of a suspected
problem, you would report the signs or symptoms and not a code
from the P00-P04 observation codes.
EXERCISE 3-6
Observation Stay
Answer the following:
1 
The patient fell off his motorcycle when turning too sharply and hit
his head on the sidewalk. The patient was wearing a helmet. The
examination reveals no outward apparent head injury. The only
injury noted on examination is abrasion of the right upper arm. The
patient is admitted overnight to the observation unit to rule out
head injury. No head injury was found.
a 
Hospital observation is located in the Index
under the main term “Observation.” Listed
under the main term are the reasons for
observation. The subterm is “accident NEC”
and subterm “transport.” Check the code in the
Tabular. What is the Z code?
Code: ________________
b 
The second code is for the abrasion to the right
upper arm. When you locate “Abrasion” and
subterm “arm (upper),” you are directed to
S40.81- (the “-” indicates that the Tabular is to
be referenced for the additional character[s]).
What is the code for the abrasion?
Code: ________________
2 
An adult patient is admitted for observation and further evaluation
following an alleged rape, ruled out.
a 
There is only one code for this case. What is that
Z code?
Code: ________________
3 
A 35-year-old female patient was admitted to observation for severe
nausea and vomiting following diagnostic laparoscopy for pelvic
pain.
First-listed diagnosis:
______________________________________________
4 
A male patient was admitted to observation following an
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for acute
pancreatitis. Patient has a biliary duct stricture.
First-listed diagnosis:
______________________________________________
5 
Patient was admitted for observation because of urinary retention
following a Dilation and Curettage (D&C) for post-menopausal
bleeding.
First-listed diagnosis:
______________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
First-listed diagnosis and coexisting
conditions
You have already had practice at selecting the first-listed diagnosis,
and you know that it is possible for the first-listed diagnosis to be a
symptom. The important information in this Guideline is that
additional codes should be assigned for any coexisting conditions that
are present or treated during that visit or encounter. Sometimes there
is more than one symptom that is present.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.G.
ICD-10-CM code for the diagnosis, condition, problem, or
other reason for encounter/visit
List first the ICD-10-CM code for the diagnosis, condition, problem,
or other reason for encounter/visit shown in the medical record to be
chiefly responsible for the services provided. List additional codes
that describe any coexisting conditions. In some cases the first-listed
diagnosis may be a symptom when a diagnosis has not been
established (confirmed) by the physician.
Examples
Coexisting conditions
An established patient was seen in the clinic for dyspnea on exertion.
The patient has hypertension and Graves’ disease. No etiology for the
dyspnea was determined. The patient’s medication prescriptions for
hypertension and Graves’ disease were refilled.
Codes: R06.00 dyspnea, I10 hypertension, E05.00 Graves’ disease.
An initial office visit for a 55-year-old male with jaundice and
fatigue. Laboratory tests were ordered and patient will return in 1
week for the results.
Codes: R17 jaundice, R53.83 fatigue (either of these diagnoses could be
the first-listed diagnosis).
EXERCISE 3-7
First-Listed Diagnosis and Coexisting
Conditions
Identify the first-listed diagnosis and any coexisting conditions.
Assign the I-10 codes.
1 
Patient was seen in the office for a consultation for palpitations.
Patient also has rheumatoid arthritis. Medications that the patient
takes for the arthritis were reviewed to see if they could be the
cause of the palpitations.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
Code: ________________
Other diagnosis: ___________________
Code: ________________
2 
Patient is an established patient with memory loss. Patient also has a
long-term (current) use of insulin for diabetes type 2.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
Code: ________________
Other diagnoses: ___________________ and
___________________
Codes: ________________ and ________________
3 
Established patient seen for management of vitamin B12 deficiency
and hypertension
First-listed diagnosis: ________________________
Code: ________________
Other diagnoses: ____________________________
Other code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Uncertain diagnoses
In an inpatient setting, uncertain diagnoses are reported, but in the
outpatient setting these uncertain diagnoses are not reported as
explained in the Section IV.H of the Guidelines.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.H.
Uncertain diagnosis
Do not code diagnoses documented as “probable”, “suspected,”
“questionable,” “rule out,” or “working diagnosis” or other similar
terms indicating uncertainty. Rather, code the condition(s) to the
highest degree of certainty for that encounter/visit, such as
symptoms, signs, abnormal test results, or other reason for the visit.
Please note:
 This differs from the coding practices used by short-
term, acute care, long-term care and psychiatric hospitals.
Examples
Uncertain diagnosis
A chest x-ray is ordered to rule out pneumonia. Patient has cough
and fever. The x-ray is normal.
Codes: R05 cough, R50.9 fever. The pneumonia cannot be coded as it
is documented as a rule out and has not been confirmed.
A 55-year-old male was seen with loss of appetite and jaundice.
Further diagnostic studies are needed for suspected cancer of the
pancreas.
Codes: R17 jaundice, R63.0 loss of appetite. No code can be assigned
for cancer of the pancreas because it is “suspected” and not yet
confirmed.
EXERCISE 3-8
Uncertain Diagnoses
Identify the diagnoses and I-10 codes that should be assigned:
1 
Patient is seen in the office for pain and stiffness of the right knee. X-
rays to rule out osteoarthritis were performed.
Reported diagnosis and code:
___________________________________________________________
Reported diagnosis and code:
___________________________________________________________
Diagnosis not reported:
_______________________________________________________________
2 
Office visit for established patient with left wrist pain and numbness
of fingertips. Studies ordered for probable carpal tunnel syndrome.
Reported diagnosis and code:
___________________________________________________________
Reported diagnosis and code:
___________________________________________________________
Diagnosis not reported:
_________________________________________________________________
3 
Office consultation for a new patient with amenorrhea and
galactorrhea. Studies to rule out pituitary tumor were ordered.
Reported diagnosis and code:
___________________________________________________________
Reported diagnosis and code:
___________________________________________________________
Diagnosis not reported:
________________________________________________________________
4 
Initial visit for a patient with a breast lump. Working diagnosis is
breast cancer. Diagnostic workup has been scheduled.
Reported diagnosis and code:
___________________________________________________________
Diagnosis not reported:
________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chronic diseases
If a patient has a chronic condition that is treated on an ongoing basis,
you can report the condition as many times as the patient receives
care or treatment for the condition.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.I.
Chronic diseases
Chronic diseases treated on an ongoing basis may be coded and
reported as many times as the patient receives treatment and care for
the condition(s).
Examples
Chronic diseases
An established patient is seen for equal management of mild,
intermittent, uncomplicated asthma and type 2 diabetes.
Codes: J45.20 Asthma, E11.9 Diabetes, type 2 (either code could be the
first-listed)
An established patient is seen for continued management of
systemic lupus erythematosus.
Code: M32.9 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Documented conditions
Code conditions that coexist at the time of the encounter and for
which the physician provides care, treatment, or management.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.J.
Code all documented conditions that coexist
Code all documented conditions that coexist at the time of the
encounter/visit, and require or affect patient care treatment or
management. Do not code conditions that were previously treated
and no longer exist. However, history codes (categories Z80-Z87) may
be used as secondary codes if the historical condition or family
history has an impact on current care or influences treatment.
Examples
Coexisting conditions
An established patient is seen in follow-up for coronary artery disease
of a native artery. The patient is also a diabetic on oral medications.
The patient had a coronary artery bypass graft 6 months ago. Labs
were reviewed and prescriptions for diabetic medications were
renewed.
Codes: I25.10 coronary artery disease, E11.9 diabetes, type 2 (chronic
coexisting conditions that were managed during this visit), Z95.1
history of CABG (acceptable to report as this is important in a
patient with coronary artery disease).
An established patient is seen for management of hypertension and
congestive heart failure. Patient has a family history of colonic
polyps.
Codes: I10 hypertension, I50.9 congestive heart failure (either could be
first-listed diagnosis). No Z code is necessary to identify the family
history of colonic polyps as it has no bearing on the treatment of
hypertension and congestive heart failure.
EXERCISE 3-9
Chronic Diseases
Identify the I-10 codes that should be assigned:
1 
Harry Drew, a patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
presents for a one-week follow-up for bronchitis. He continues to
smoke 1 package of cigarettes per day, against repeated medical
advice.
Codes: ________________, ________________
2 
Harry Drew presents 10 days later for repeated follow-up regarding
his bronchitis and to ensure that the infection had responded to the
antibiotic prescribed 10 days previously. The physician determined
that the bronchitis had responded well and no further bronchitis
was identified. The patient’s COPD continues to inhibit his
activities. He continues to smoke 1 package of cigarettes per day
and since his bronchitis has improved, he says he is smoking “a bit
more.”
Codes: ________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diagnostic services
When a diagnostic service is provided to a patient during an
encounter, the reason for the service is the diagnosis stated in the
medical record, or when no diagnostic statement is available, report
the primary reason the patient presented for the service.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.K.
Patients receiving diagnostic services only
For patients receiving diagnostic services only during an
encounter/visit, sequence first the diagnosis, condition, problem, or
other reason for encounter/visit shown in the medical record to be
chiefly responsible for the outpatient services provided during the
encounter/visit. Codes for other diagnoses (e.g., chronic conditions)
may be sequenced as additional diagnoses.
For encounters for routine laboratory/radiology testing in the
absence of any signs, symptoms, or associated diagnosis, assign
Z01.89, Encounter for other specified special examinations. If routine
testing is performed during the same encounter as a test to evaluate a
sign, symptom, or diagnosis, it is appropriate to assign both the 
Z
code and the code describing the reason for the non-routine test.
For outpatient encounters for diagnostic tests that have been
interpreted by a physician, and the final report is available at the time
of coding, code any confirmed or definitive diagnosis(es)
documented in the interpretation. Do not code related signs and
symptoms as additional diagnoses.
Please note:
 This differs from the coding practice in the hospital
inpatient setting regarding abnormal findings on test results.
Examples
Diagnostic services only
Patient encounter for blood typing prior to outpatient surgery
tomorrow.
Z01.83 encounter for blood typing.
Patient is having an MRI of the head to monitor the progression of
brain tumor.
D49.6 brain tumor.
Patient without any symptoms had a CBC (complete blood count).
Z01.89 laboratory examination without any sign or symptom
documented.
Patient was seen for shortness of breath and fever with a negative
x-ray. Patient returned the next day for a CT of chest, which
confirmed the presence of pneumonia.
J18.9 pneumonia.
EXERCISE 3-10
Diagnostic Services
Identify the diagnoses and I-10 codes that should be assigned:
1 
David presents for blood typing for his surgery in two days.
Code: ________________
2 
Chris, a 43-year-old male patient, presents for his annual
examination.
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Therapeutic services
Report the diagnosis, condition, problem, or other reason for the
encounter when a patient presents for a therapeutic service.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.L.
Patients receiving therapeutic services only
For patients receiving therapeutic services only during an
encounter/visit, sequence first the diagnosis, condition, problem, or
other reason for encounter/visit shown in the medical record to be
chiefly responsible for the outpatient services provided during the
encounter/visit. Codes for other diagnoses (e.g., chronic conditions)
may be sequenced as additional diagnoses.
The only exception to this rule is that when the primary reason for
the admission/encounter is chemotherapy or radiation therapy, the
appropriate Z code for the service is listed first, and the diagnosis or
problem for which the service is being performed listed second.
Examples
Therapeutic services only
Patient had an outpatient phlebotomy performed for polycythemia
vera.
D45 polycythemia vera.
Female patient received outpatient chemotherapy for breast cancer
with metastasis to the axillary lymph nodes.
Z51.11 encounter for chemotherapy, C50.919 breast cancer, and C77.3
metastasis to axillary lymph nodes.
Patient had monthly B12 shot for pernicious anemia.
D51.0 pernicious anemia, congenital.
EXERCISE 3-11
Therapeutic Services
Identify the I-10 codes that should be assigned.
1 
The patient presents for a chemotherapy treatment due to primary,
malignant ovarian cancer of the left ovary.
Codes: ________________, ________________
2 
A patient with dietary folate deficiency anemia presents for a folate
injection.
Code: ________________
3 
A patient presents for allergy testing.
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Preoperative evaluation
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.M.
Patients receiving preoperative evaluations only
For patients receiving preoperative evaluations only, sequence first a
code from subcategory Z01.81, Encounter for pre-procedural
examinations, to describe the pre-op consultations. Assign a code for
the condition to describe the reason for the surgery as an additional
diagnosis. Code also any findings related to the pre-op evaluation.
Usually, a surgeon will want a preoperative clearance performed by
the patient’s primary care provider, often due to a chronic or pre-
existing condition. When the primary care provider reports the
diagnosis for this visit, the first-listed diagnosis will be the
appropriate Z code to indicate the encounter is for preop clearance;
then the reason for the upcoming surgery is reported followed by the
condition requiring the clearance. The Z code will be one of the
following:
Z01.810 Preoperative cardiovascular examination
Z01.811 Preoperative respiratory examination
Z01.812 Preoperative laboratory examination
Blood and urine tests prior to treatment or
procedure
Z01.818 Other preprocedural examination
TOOLBOX 3-1
 
Sam is a 7-year-old male patient who is brought to Dr. Well’s office
for a pre-procedural consultation for a mass on his left lung. Dr. Well
reviews the patient’s x-rays and MRI taken the previous week and
sent from Dr. Grossman, Sam’s pediatrician.
Questions
1. 
What Z code would you report for the pre-procedural consultation?
_____________
2. 
In addition to the Z code, you would report what diagnosis?
_____________
3. 
Would the Z code or diagnosis code be first-listed? _____________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
EXERCISE 3-12
Preoperative Evaluations
Match the following code descriptions to the correct codes:
1 
Z01.810
_____
a 
Preoperative cardiovascular examination
2 
Z01.811
_____
b 
Preoperative respiratory examination
3 
Z01.818
_____
c 
Preoperative examination
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Preoperative evaluations only
When the only service is a preoperative examination, report the
appropriate Z code along with any codes that indicate significant
conditions.
Examples
Preoperative examinations
Patient is seen by cardiologist for surgical clearance for upcoming
cataract surgery. The patient has coronary artery disease (CAD) and
has a history of angioplasty and cardiac stent. Patient’s medical
condition from a cardiac standpoint is stable. Patient can proceed
with cataract removal.
Z01.810 preoperative cardiovascular examination, H26.9 cataract,
I25.10 coronary artery disease, Z95.5 history of cardiac angioplasty
with stent placement.
Patient is seen by internist for medical clearance for inguinal hernia
repair. The patient has a number of chronic medical conditions,
including hypertension, diabetes type 2, and chronic atrial fibrillation.
Z01.818 other specified preoperative examination, K40.90 inguinal
hernia, I10 hypertension, E11.9 diabetes type 2, I48.2 chronic atrial
fibrillation.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING REPORTING
SECTION IV.N.
Ambulatory surgery
For ambulatory surgery, code the diagnosis for which the surgery
was performed. If the postoperative diagnosis is known to be
different from the preoperative diagnosis at the time the diagnosis is
confirmed, select the postoperative diagnosis for coding, since it is the
most definitive.
Examples
Pre and postoperative diagnoses are the same
The patient has an EGD for upper gastrointestinal bleeding. The
postoperative diagnosis is upper gastrointestinal bleeding, etiology
undetermined, K92.2.
Pre and postoperative diagnoses are different
The patient has an EGD for upper gastrointestinal bleeding. The
postoperative diagnosis is gastrointestinal bleeding due to gastric
ulcer, K25.4.
Prenatal visits
There are specific rules for reporting routine prenatal visits that are
provided in an outpatient setting. Read the Guidelines to learn the
details regarding this assignment.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION IV.O.
Routine outpatient prenatal visits
See Section I.C.15. Routine outpatient prenatal visits.
SECTION I.C. 15.B. Selection of ob principal or first-listed
diagnosis
1) 
Routine outpatient prenatal visits
For routine outpatient prenatal visits when no complications are
present, a code from category Z34, Encounter for supervision of
normal pregnancy, should be used as the first-listed diagnosis.
These codes should not be used in conjunction with 
chapter 15
codes.
2) 
Supervision of High-Risk Pregnancy
Codes from category O09, Supervision of high-risk pregnancy, are
intended for use only during the prenatal period. For
complications during the labor or delivery episode as a result of a
high-risk pregnancy, assign the applicable complication codes
from Chapter 15. If there are no complications during the labor or
delivery episode, assign code O80, Encounter for full-term
uncomplicated delivery.
For routine prenatal outpatient visits for patients with high-risk
pregnancies, a code from category O09, Supervision of high-risk
pregnancy, should be used as the first-listed diagnosis. Secondary
chapter 15
 codes may be used in conjunction with these codes if
appropriate.
Examples
First pregnancy without complication
A 25-year-old female presents for initial prenatal visit. This is her first
pregnancy. No problems were identified. Z34.00
Second pregnancy without complication
A 25-year-old female presents for initial prenatal visit. Patient had an
uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a term female infant 3 years ago.
No problems were identified. Z34.80
Prenatal visit with complication (code from 
chapter 15
)
A 25-year-old female is seen for a routine prenatal visit in second
trimester. Her laboratory results indicate that she has a urinary tract
infection. She is given a prescription for antibiotics and will return in
1 week for repeat urinalysis. O23.42
CHAPTER REVIEW
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 3, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 In the outpatient setting, the term 
first-listed diagnosis
 is used in lieu
of what diagnosis? __________
2 What diagnosis is used when the documented condition is not
confirmed in the outpatient setting? __________
3 What is the first-listed diagnosis when a patient presents for
outpatient surgery? __________
4 It is important to code all the conditions or problems that are being
managed during an encounter to support what? __________
5 Z codes are used more frequently in what setting? __________
6 What two code categories are used to report the first-listed diagnosis
for medical observation for suspected conditions and conditions
ruled out? __________ __________
7 Additional diagnosis codes are used to report what conditions?
__________
8 In what setting are uncertain diagnoses reported? __________
9 What type of condition may be reported as many times as the
patient receives care or treatment for? __________
10 What code is assigned for encounters for routine
laboratory/radiology testing in the absence of any signs, symptoms,
or associated diagnosis? __________
11 When the primary reason for therapeutic services is chemotherapy
or radiation therapy, what code category is assigned as the first
listed diagnosis? __________
12 What code is assigned as an additional diagnosis for patients
receiving preoperative evaluations? __________
13 For routine outpatient prenatal visits when no complications are
present, what code category is assigned? __________
14 When the postoperative diagnosis is different than the preoperative
diagnosis at the time the diagnosis is confirmed, which diagnosis is
reported? __________
Chapter 3, part I, theory
Answer the following questions about the Diagnostic Coding and Reporting
Guidelines for Outpatient Services:
1 When a patient is to have outpatient surgery and the surgery is not
performed due to contraindication, the reason that the surgery was
not performed is the first-listed diagnosis.
True   False
2 It is appropriate to code the postoperative diagnosis as it is the most
definitive diagnosis for ambulatory surgery.
True   False
3 Chronic diseases that are treated on an ongoing basis should be
coded and reported as often as the patient receives treatment and
care for the chronic conditions.
True   False
4 In the physician office it is acceptable to report Z codes as a first-
listed diagnosis.
True   False
5 In the outpatient setting it is unacceptable to have a sign or
symptom as the first-listed diagnosis.
True   False
6 When coding an encounter for preoperative evaluation, the reason
that the patient is having the surgery or procedure performed is the
first-listed diagnosis.
True   False
7 In the outpatient setting, diagnoses that are documented as
“probable,” “suspected,” “rule out,” or “questionable” are reported
to the highest degree of certainty, such as symptoms, signs,
abnormal test results, or other reasons for the visit.
True   False
8 The first-listed diagnosis is defined as the diagnosis that is the most
serious.
True   False
9 It is acceptable to report a code from 
Chapter 15
 in conjunction with
Z34.00 or Z34.80.
True   False
10 It is acceptable to code signs and symptoms even when a definitive
diagnosis has been confirmed.
True   False
Chapter 3, part II, practical
Identify the first-listed diagnoses and assign the appropriate I-10 codes in the
following encounters or visits:
11 Initial office visit for diaper rash
First-listed diagnosis: _______________
Code: ________________
12 Established patient presents with dyspnea and lower extremity
edema. The physician determined that the patient’s symptoms were
due to an exacerbation of congestive heart failure.
First-listed diagnosis: _______________
Code: ________________
13 Patient is a new patient who was seen for flank pain and diagnosed
with a urinary tract infection, and antibiotics were prescribed. Patient
has psoriasis, which is stable at this time.
First-listed diagnosis: ____________________
Code: ________________
Other diagnosis: ___________________
Code: ________________
14 Patient was admitted as an outpatient for a left arthroscopic knee
procedure to repair old anterior cruciate ligament tear.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________________
Code: ________________
15 Patient is admitted to observation for syncope. Patient has diabetes
mellitus. After testing, no cardiac or other cause was found.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________________
Code: ________________
Other diagnosis: ____________________________
Other code: ________________
16 Patient was admitted for pain management following biopsy of the
kidney for Stage IV chronic kidney disease.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________________
Code: ________________
Other diagnosis: ____________________________
Other code: ________________
17 Patient is seen by pulmonologist for surgical clearance for
upcoming surgery. Patient has emphysema and is scheduled to
have an endarterectomy for severe carotid stenosis on the right.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________________
Code: ________________
Other diagnosis 1:
____________________________
Other code 1: ________________
Other diagnosis 2:
____________________________
Other code 2: ________________
18 Patient had an outpatient cystoscopy. The preoperative diagnosis is
hematuria. Postoperative diagnosis is hematuria due to bladder
cancer.
First-listed diagnosis: ________________________
Code: ________________
Assign the appropriate Z code for the following:
19 Exposure to asbestos ________________
20 Personal history of colonic polyps ________________
21 Heart transplant status ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 4
Using ICD-10-CM
 
“More codes are required in ICD-10-CM to ‘draw the picture’ for
accurate diagnostic data retrieval. Documentation has to be improved
and coders will also need to act as auditors to efficiently retrieve the
information needed to complete the billing process.”
Sharon J. Oliver, CPC, CPC-I, CPMA
Senior Inpatient Coder
 
East Tennessee State University Physicians & Associates
 
Johnson City, Tennessee
CHAPTER TOPICS
Organization of the Guidelines
Accurate Coding
Alphabetic Index and Tabular List
Level of Specificity
Integral Conditions
Multiple Coding
Acute and Chronic Combination Codes
Late Effects
Reporting Same Diagnosis Code More Than Once
Laterality
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Demonstrate ability to utilize the Alphabetic Index and Tabular List.
2 
Understand the steps to accurate coding.
3 
Comprehend the organization of the Guidelines.
4 
Use both the Alphabetic Index and Tabular List.
5 
Outline the need for level of specificity in diagnosis coding.
6 
Identify conditions integral to a disease process.
7 
Assign multiple codes to a single condition.
8 
Report acute and chronic conditions.
9 
Demonstrate application of combination codes.
10 
Differentiate between residual and late effects.
11 
Abstract information that determines if a condition is impending or
threatened.
12 
Outline the rules when reporting the same diagnosis code more
than once.
13 
Assign codes based on laterality.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Organization of the guidelines
The 
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
 have been developed
and approved for coding and reporting by the Cooperating Parties for
I-10: the American Hospital Association (AHA), American Health
Information Management Association (AHIMA), Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS), and National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS).
The complete 2016 
ICD-10-CM Official Guidelines for Coding and
Reporting
 are posted on the Web at
www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm
. The 
Guidelines
 are organized
into sections. Section I of the Guidelines includes the structure and
conventions of the classification and general guidelines that apply to
the entire classification, and chapter-specific guidelines that
correspond to the chapters as they are arranged in the classification.
Section II includes guidelines for selection of principal diagnosis for
non-outpatient (hospital) settings. Section III includes guidelines for
reporting additional diagnoses in non-outpatient settings. Section IV
is for outpatient coding and reporting. Outpatient coders, however,
use guidance from throughout the 
Official Guidelines for Coding and
Reporting
 because not all of the coding circumstances are fully
explained in Section IV of the Guidelines. Within your learning
activities, the number that appears to the left of the guideline is the
number of the guideline as listed in the 
Official Guidelines for Coding
and Reporting.
Accurate coding
You will be practicing coding using the I-10 throughout this chapter.
You need to practice using the steps that are always necessary to
assign an I-10 code. If you begin your I-10 coding using these steps,
you will develop good coding habits that will last throughout your
career.
Steps to accurate coding
1. 
Identify the main term(s) in the diagnostic statement.
2. 
Locate the main term(s) in the Alphabetic Index (referred to in this
material as the Index).
3. 
Review any subterms under the main term in the Index.
4. 
Follow any cross-reference instructions, such as 
see.
5. 
Verify the code(s) selected from the Index in the Tabular List
(referred to in this material as the Tabular).
6. 
Refer to any instructional notations in the Tabular.
7. 
Assign codes to the highest level of specificity.
8. 
Code the diagnosis until all elements are completely identified.
Alphabetic index and tabular list
Guidelines are presented and followed by examples or exercises to
illustrate the rule(s). Let’s get started with a general coding guideline
regarding locating codes in the ICD-10-CM.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 1.
Locating a code in the ICD-10-CM
To select a code in the classification that corresponds to a diagnosis or
reason for visit documented in a medical record, first locate the term
in the Alphabetic Index, and then verify the code in the Tabular List.
Read and be guided by instructional notations that appear in both the
Alphabetic Index and the Tabular List.
It is essentia
l to use both the Alphabetic Index and Tabular List
when locating and assigning a code. The Alphabetic Index does not
always provide the full code. Selection of the full code, including
laterality and any applicable 7
th
 character can only be done in the
Tabular List. A dash (-) at the end of an Alphabetic Index entry
indicates that additional characters are required. Even if a dash is not
included at the Alphabetic Index entry, it is necessary to refer to the
Tabular List to verify that no 7
th
 character is required.
Example of the Use of Both the
Alphabetic Index and Tabular List
1. 
Diagnosis:
Hodgkin Disease- see Lymphoma, Hodgkin
Index:
Lymphoma
 (main term)
Hodgkin (subterm) C81.9
Tabular:
C81 Hodgkin lymphoma
 [category code]
C81.9 Hodgkin lymphoma, unspecified
 [subcategory code]
C81.90 Hodgkin lymphoma, unspecified, unspecified site
 (subclassification code)
Code:
C81.90 Unspecified Hodgkin disease, unspecified site
Verify C81.90 in the Tabular and read any notes indicated in the
Tabular to ensure that the code is complete and correct before
assignment.
Example of the Use of Both the
Alphabetic Index and Tabular List
2. 
Diagnosis:
Stroke, due to vertebral artery occlusion
Index:
Stroke
 (main term) I63.9
meaning
cerebral infarction - code to Infarction, cerebral
Index:
Infarct, infarction
cerebral (
see also
 Occlusion, artery cerebral or precerebral, with infarction) I63.9
due to
occlusion NEC
precerebral arteries 163.2-
Index:
Occlusion, occluded
artery (
see also
 Embolism, artery) I74.9
vertebral I65.0-
with
infarction I63.21-
Tabular:
I63 Cerebral infarction
I63.2 Cerebral infarction due to unspecified occlusion or stenosis of precerebral arteries
I63.21 Cerebral infarction due to unspecified occlusion or stenosis of vertebral arteries
I63.219 Cerebral infarction due to unspecified occlusion or stenosis of unspecified vertebral arteries
Level of specificity
The level of specificity is the level of detail and detail is very
important in diagnosis coding. Review the Guideline regarding
specificity.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 2.
Level of detail in coding
Diagnosis codes are to be used and reported at their highest number
of characters available.
ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes are composed of codes with 3, 4, 5, 6 or
7 characters. Codes with three characters are included in ICD-10-CM
as the heading of a category of codes that may be further subdivided
by the use of fourth and/or fifth characters and/or sixth characters,
which provide greater detail.
A three-character code is to be used only if it is not further
subdivided. A code is invalid if it has not been coded to the full
number of characters required for that code, including the 7
th
character, if applicable.
Examples
Three-Character Code
Diagnosis:
Infectious colitis
Index:
Colitis
 (acute) (catarrhal) (chronic (noninfective) (hemorrhagic) - 
see also
 Enteritis K52.9
infectious - 
see
 Enteritis, infectious
Index:
Enteritis
 (acute) (diarrheal) (hemorrhagic) (noninfective) (septic) K52.9
infectious NOS A09
Tabular:
A09 Infectious gastroenteritis and colitis, unspecified
Code:
A09 Infectious colitis
Four-Character Code
Diagnosis:
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, nontraumatic
Index:
Hemorrhage, hemorrhagic
 (concealed) R58
subarachnoid (nontraumatic) - 
see
 Hemorrhage, intracranial,   subarachnoid
intracranial (nontraumatic)
subarachnoid (nontraumatic) (from) I60.9
Tabular:
I60.9 Nontraumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, unspecified
Code:
I60.9 Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Five-Character Code
Diagnosis:
Aseptic meningitis in leptospirosis
Index:
Leptospirosis
 A27.9
Tabular:
A27 Leptospirosis
A27.8 Other forms of leptospirosis
A27.81 Aseptic meningitis in leptospirosis
Code:
A27.81 Aseptic meningitis in leptospirosis
Six-Character Code
Diagnosis:
Biotinidase deficiency
Index:
Deficiency, deficient
biotinidase D81.810
Tabular:
D81 Combined immunodeficiencies
D81.8 Other combined immunodeficiencies
D81.81 Biotin-dependent carboxylase deficiency
Multiple carboxylase deficiency
EXCLUDES1 
biotin-dependent carboxylase   deficiency due to dietary   deficiency of biotin (E53.8)
D81.810 Biotinidase deficiency
Code:
D81.810 Biotinidase deficiency
Seven-Character Code
Diagnosis:
Initial encounter for fatigue fracture of vertebra
Index:
Fracture, traumatic
fatigue - 
see also
 Fracture, stress   vertebra M48.40
Tabular:
M48.4 Fatigue fracture of vertebra
The appropriate 7th character is to be added to each code   from subcategory M48.4:
A initial encounter for fracture
D subsequent encounter for fracture with routine healing
G subsequent encounter for fracture with delayed healing
S sequela of fracture
M48.40 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, site unspecified
Code:
M48.40XA Initial encounter for fatigue fracture of vertebra
EXERCISE 4-1
Level of Specificity in Coding
Place the code you locate in the Index and Tabular on the line
provided:
1
Diagnosis:
Recurrent right inguinal hernia, with obstruction
Index:
Hernia, hernial
 (acquired) (recurrent) ________________ inguinal (direct) (external) (funicular) (indirect)
(internal) (oblique) (scrotal)   (sliding) ________________
Tabular:
K40 Inguinal hernia>
________________ 
Unilateral inguinal hernia, with obstruction without
gangrene
________________ 
Unilateral inguinal hernia, with obstruction, without gangrene, recurrent>
2
Diagnosis:
Primary hypertension
Index:
Hypertension, hypertensive
 (accelerated) (benign) (essential) (idiopathic) (malignant) (systemic)
________________
Tabular:
Essential (primary) hypertension
Includes: high blood pressure hypertension   (arterial) (benign) (essential) (malignant)   (primary)
(systemic)
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Integral conditions
When the signs or symptoms are due to a diagnosed condition, the
signs or symptoms are not reported separately. If the signs or
symptoms are not due to a diagnosed condition, the signs and
symptoms should be reported.
This may require the coder to query the physician regarding the
reporting of signs and symptoms that may or may not be routinely
associated with a disease process.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 6.
Conditions that are not an integral part of a disease process
Additional signs and symptoms that may not be associated routinely
with a disease process should be coded when present.
Integral Part of a Disease Process
Example 1
Diagnosis:
Fever and shortness of breath due to pneumonia
Index:
Pneumonia J18.9
Tabular:
J18.9 Pneumonia, unspecified organism
Code:
J18.9 Pneumonia
Fever and shortness of breath are common symptoms of
pneumonia so additional codes would not be assigned.
Integral Part of a Disease Process
Example 2
Diagnosis:
Abdominal pain that is exacerbated by eating. The patient was diagnosed as having a gastric ulcer.
Index:
Ulcer, ulcerated, ulcerating, ulceration, ulcerative
stomach (eroded) (peptic) (round) K25.9
Tabular:
K25  Gastric ulcer
K25.9 Gastric ulcer, unspecified as acute or chronic, without hemorrhage or perforation
Code:
K25.9 Gastric ulcer
Abdominal pain that is exacerbated (made worse) by eating is a
common symptom of a gastric ulcer.
Not an Integral Part of a Disease Process
Example 1
Diagnosis:
Dehydration and pneumonia
Index:
Pneumonia J18.9
Tabular:
J18.9 Pneumonia, unspecified organism
Code:
J18.9 Pneumonia
Index:
Dehydration
 E86.0
Tabular:
E86 Volume depletion
E86.0 Dehydration
Code:
E86.0 Dehydration
Codes:
J18.9 (pneumonia) and E86.0 (dehydration)
Dehydration can result from a wide range of diseases, but not all
patients who have pneumonia become dehydrated. Dehydration
would be reported with an additional code.
Not an Integral Part of a Disease Process
Example 2
Diagnosis:
Ascites and cirrhosis of the liver
Index:
Cirrhosis, cirrhotic
 (hepatic) (liver) K74.60
liver K74.60
alcoholic K70.30
with ascites K70.31
Tabular:
K74  Fibrosis and cirrhosis of liver
K74.6  Other and unspecified cirrhosis of liver
K74.60 Unspecified cirrhosis of liver
Code:
K74.60 Cirrhosis of the liver
Index:
Ascites (abdominal)
 R18.8
Tabular:
R18  Ascites
R18.8  Other ascites
 Ascites NOS
 Peritoneal effusion (chronic)
Code:
K74.60 (cirrhosis) and R18.8 (ascites)
Ascites is not present in all patients with cirrhosis of the liver. It
would be incorrect to assume that the cirrhosis of the liver was due to
alcohol because this was not stated in the diagnosis statement. The
ascites should be reported in this case as the patient’s treatment may
be affected by the ascites.
 
QUICK CHECK 4-1
1. 
A patient presents with the chief complaint of headache of three
days’ duration and frequent urination. Would you report both the
headache and urination?
Yes   No
2. 
If the patient’s medical record stated SOB due to asthma, would you
report the SOB?
Yes   No
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 4-2
Integral Conditions
Without the use of reference material, answer the following:
1 
List two common symptoms of appendicitis.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
List the most common symptom associated with costochondritis.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
3 
Patient has rheumatoid arthritis and anemia. The anemia is integral
to the rheumatoid arthritis.
True False
4 
Patient has dyspnea due to congestive heart failure. Dyspnea should
be assigned as an additional code.
True False
Circle the diagnoses that should NOT be coded for the condition in
bold typeface:
5 
Acute myocardial infarction
Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Congestive heart failure
6 
Fractured hip
Hip pain
Contusion of hip
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Multiple coding
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 7.
Multiple coding for a single condition
In addition to the etiology/manifestation convention that requires two
codes to fully describe a single condition that affects multiple body
systems, there are other single conditions that also require more than
one code. “Use additional code” notes are found in the Tabular List at
codes that are not part of an etiology/manifestation pair where a
secondary code is useful to fully describe a condition. The sequencing
rule is the same as the etiology/manifestation pair, “use additional
code” indicates that a secondary code should be added.
For example, for bacterial infections that are not included in
chapter 1
, a secondary code from category B95, Streptococcus,
Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus, as the cause of diseases classified
elsewhere, or B96, Other bacterial agents as the cause of diseases
classified elsewhere, may be required to identify the bacterial
organism causing the infection. A “use additional code” note will
normally be found at the infectious disease code, indicating a need
for the organism code to be added as a secondary code.
“Code first” notes are also under certain codes that are not
specifically manifestation codes but may be due to an underlying
cause. When there is a “code first” note and an underlying condition
is present, the underlying condition should be sequenced first.
“Code, if applicable, any causal condition first,” notes indicate that
this code may be assigned as a principal diagnosis when the causal
condition is unknown or not applicable. If a causal condition is
known, then the code for that condition should be sequenced as the
principal or first-listed diagnosis.
Multiple codes may be needed for sequela, complication codes and
obstetric codes to more fully describe a condition. See the specific
guidelines for these conditions for further instruction.
Single Code Reporting Manifestation and
Etiology
Example 1
Diagnosis:
Diabetic retinopathy with type 1 diabetes
In this diagnosis statement, retinopathy is the manifestation
(symptom) and diabetes is the etiology (cause) of the retinopathy.
Index:
Diabetes, diabetic
 (mellitus) (familial) (sugar) E11.9
type 1 E10.9
with
retinopathy E10.319
Tabular:
E10.3 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic complications
E10.31 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy
E10.319 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy without macular edema
Code:
E10.319 Type 1 diabetic retinopathy
Multiple Codes Reporting Manifestation
and Etiology (Also Known as Dual
Coding)
Example 2
Diagnosis:
Staphylococcal aureus
 cellulitis of the face
(Staphylococcal infection is the etiology and cellulitis is the
manifestation.)
Index:
Cellulitis
 (diffuse) (phlegmonous) (septic) (suppurative) L03.90
face NEC L03.211
Tabular:
L03.2 Cellulitis and acute lymphangitis of face and neck
L03.21 Cellulitis and acute lymphangitis of face
L03.211 Cellulitis of face
Code:
L03.211 Cellulitis of the face
You now must identify the code for the etiology (staphylococcal).
Index:
Infection, infected, infective
 (opportunistic) B99.9
bacterial NOS A49.9
as cause of disease classified elsewhere B96.89
Staphylococcus B95.8
 aureus (methicillin susceptible) (MSSA) B95.61
Tabular:
B95  Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B95.6 Staphylococcus aureus as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B95.61 Methicillin susceptible Staphylococcus aureus infection as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
(MSSA)
This category of code is to be assigned as an additional or
supplementary code to identify the infectious agent in diseases
classified elsewhere.
Codes:
L03.211 (Cellulitis of face) and B95.61 (Staphylococcus aureus)
EXERCISE 4-3
Multiple or Combination Coding
Using multiple codes, fill in the code(s) for the following diagnoses:
1 
Chronic prostatitis due to 
Streptococcus
Codes: ________________, ________________
2 
Acute bronchitis due to 
Pseudomonas
Codes: ________________, ________________
3 
Gangrene due to diabetes mellitus, type 1
Code: ________________
4 
Urinary tract infection due to 
Escherichia coli
Codes: ________________, ________________
5 
Amyloid cardiomyopathy
Codes: ________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Acute and chronic
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 8.
Acute and chronic conditions
If the same condition is described as both acute (subacute) and
chronic, and separate subentries exist in the Alphabetic Index at the
same indentation level, code both and sequence the acute (subacute)
code first.
According to the Guideline for acute and chronic conditions, if the
condition has separate subentries with the same indentation level for
acute and chronic in the Index of I-10, code both the acute and chronic
condition, with the acute listed first followed by the chronic condition.
For example, 
Fig. 4-1
 illustrates the format of acute pancreatitis and
chronic pancreatitis. Acute pancreatitis is K85.90-K85.92 and chronic
pancreatitis is K86.1; in accordance with the Guideline, report K85.9-
first followed by K86.1.
 
QUICK CHECK 4-2
1. 
According to 
Fig. 4-1
, what is the code you would reference in the
Tabular for the following?
a. 
chronic recurrent pancreatitis _____________
b. 
acute idiopathic pancreatitis _____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
FIGURE 4–1
I-10 Index entry for Pancreatitis.
Acute and Chronic Conditions
Example 1
Diagnosis:
Acute and chronic thyroiditis
Index:
Thyroiditis
acute E06.0
chronic E06.5
Note that acute and chronic are at the same indentation level in the
Index, and Guideline Section I.B.8. directs the coder to sequence the
acute code first, followed by the chronic code when both conditions
were being reported.
Tabular:
E06 Thyroiditis
E06.0 Acute thyroiditis
E06.5 Other chronic thyroiditis
Sequence:
E06.0, E06.5 Acute and chronic thyroiditis
The acute form of thyroiditis is sequenced before the chronic form.
Acute and Chronic Conditions
Example 2
Diagnosis:
Acute and chronic pericarditis
Index:
Pericarditis
 (with decompensation) (with effusion)
acute I30.9
chronic (nonrheumatic) I31.9
Tabular:
I30  Acute pericarditis
I30.9 Acute pericarditis, unspecified
Tabular:
I31  Other diseases of pericardium
I31.9 Disease of pericardium, unspecified
Pericarditis (chronic) NOS
Sequence:
I30.9, I31.9 Acute and chronic pericarditis
Both acute and chronic pericarditis are indented at the same level
in the Index, requiring that both conditions be reported with the acute
condition sequenced first, followed by the chronic condition.
Combination codes
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 9.
Combination code
A combination code is a single code used to classify:
Two diagnoses, or
A diagnosis with an associated secondary process (manifestation)
A diagnosis with an associated complication
Combination codes are identified by referring to subterm entries in
the Alphabetic Index and by reading the inclusion and exclusion
notes in the Tabular List.
Assign only the combination code when that code fully identifies
the diagnostic conditions involved or when the Alphabetic Index so
directs. Multiple coding should not be used when the classification
provides a combination code that clearly identifies all of the elements
documented in the diagnosis. When the combination code lacks
necessary specificity in describing the manifestation or complication,
an additional code should be used as a secondary code.
Combination Codes
Example 1
Diagnosis:
Acute cholecystitis with cholelithiasis
Index:
Cholecystitis
 K81.9
with
cholelithiasis - 
see
 Calculus, gallbladder, with cholecystitis
Index:
Calculus
gallbladder K80.20
with
cholecystitis K80.10
acute K80.00
Tabular:
K80  Cholelithiasis
K80.0 Calculus of gallbladder with acute cholecystitis
K80.00 Calculus of gallbladder with acute cholecystitis without obstruction
Code:
K80.00 Acute cholecystitis with cholelithiasis
The combination code K80.00 fully describes the diagnosis of acute
cholecystitis with cholelithiasis.
Example 2
Another example of a diagnosis (streptococcal) and manifestation
(pharyngitis or sore throat) reported with a combination code is as
follows:
Diagnosis:
Streptococcal pharyngitis
Index:
Pharyngitis
streptococcal J02.0
Tabular:
J02 Acute pharyngitis
Includes: acute sore throat
J02.0 Streptococcal pharyngitis
Septic pharyngitis
Streptococcal sore throat
The single code J02.0 fully describes the diagnosis of streptococcal
pharyngitis.
Code:
J02.0 Streptococcal pharyngitis
EXERCISE 4-4
Acute/Chronic and Combination Codes
Assign combination codes to the following:
1 
Pneumonia due to 
Hemophilus influenzae
Code: ________________
2 
Candidiasis of the mouth (thrush)
Code: ________________
3 
Enteritis due to 
Clostridium difficile
Code: ________________
4 
Gastroenteritis due to 
Salmonella
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
From the Trenches
“We have all heard from different authorities that we need to ‘brush up’ on
our anatomy and terminology to appropriately assign ICD-10-CM codes.
Guess what!! They’re right!!!!”
SHARON
Late effects
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 10.
Sequela (late effects)
A sequela is the residual effect (condition produced) after the acute
phase of an illness or injury has terminated. There is no time limit on
when a sequela code can be used. The residual may be apparent
early, such as in cerebral infarction, or it may occur months or years
later, such as that due to a previous injury. Examples of sequela
include: scar formation resulting from a burn, deviated septum due to
a nasal fracture, and infertility due to tubal occlusion from old
tuberculosis. Coding of sequela generally requires two codes
sequenced in the following order: the condition or nature of the
sequela is sequenced first. The sequela code is sequenced second.
An exception to the above guidelines are those instances where the
code for the sequela is followed by a manifestation code identified in
the Tabular List and title, or the sequela code has been expanded (at
the fourth, fifth or sixth character levels) to include the
manifestation(s). The code for the acute phase of an illness or injury
that led to the sequela is never used with a code for the late effect.
See Section I.C.9. Sequelae of cerebrovascular disease
See Section I.C.15. Sequelae of complication of pregnancy, childbirth and
the puerperium
See Section I.C.19. Application of 7
th
 characters for
 
Chapter 19
Late effects codes are not located in a separate chapter in the
Tabular. You report late effects when the acute phase of the illness or
injury has passed but a residual remains. Sometimes an acute illness
or injury leaves a patient with a residual health problem that remains
after the illness or injury has resolved. The 
residual
 is reported 
first
and 
then
 the 
late effects
 code is assigned to indicate the cause of the
residual or late effect of the burn. An example would be scars
(residual) that remain after a severe burn (cause).
The term 
sequela
 means late effect and within the Tabular of the I-10
many codes have a 7th character to identify the sequela (character S),
as illustrated in 
Fig. 4-2
. Only one code is necessary to report a sequela
(S) of a scalp abrasion because when reporting S00.01XS, you are
reporting the residual and late effect with one code.
 
FIGURE 4–2
S00 Superficial injury of head with 7th character “S” to
report sequela.
In other instances, the code(s) only report sequela, as illustrated in
Fig. 4-3
. In these cases you will need to report the resulting condition
with a separate code and the cause (sequela) with a separate code.
 
FIGURE 4–3
B90-B94 Sequelae of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases.
There is no time limit for the development of a residual. It may be
evident at the time of the acute illness or it may occur months after an
injury. It is also possible that a patient may develop more than one
residual. For example, a patient who has had a stroke may develop
right-sided hemiparesis (paralysis of one side) and aphasia (loss of
ability to communicate).
A person cannot have a current right hip fracture (such as S72.001A)
and a late effect of a right hip fracture (such as S72.001S) at the same
time. The code is either a current injury or a condition caused by a
prior injury. It cannot be both.
EXERCISE 4-5
Residual and Cause
Write the term(s) that represent the residual and the cause terms on
the lines provided:
1 
Scars of the face resulting from third-degree burns suffered 1 year
ago
Residual:
_______________________________________________________________________________
Cause:
__________________________________________________________________________________
2 
Constrictive pericarditis due to old tuberculosis infection
Residual:
_______________________________________________________________________________
Cause:
__________________________________________________________________________________
3 
Residual foreign body in femur due to gunshot injury years ago
Residual:
_______________________________________________________________________________
Cause:
__________________________________________________________________________________
4 
Mental retardation due to previous poliomyelitis
Residual:
_______________________________________________________________________________
Cause:
__________________________________________________________________________________
5 
Leg pain resulting from old fracture of femur
Residual:
_______________________________________________________________________________
Cause:
__________________________________________________________________________________
Identify the residual and cause terms and then code the following:
6 
Arthritis following pathological fracture of the right femur 3 years
ago
Residual:
_______________________________________________________________________________
Cause:
__________________________________________________________________________________
Codes: ________________, ________________
7 
Sensorineural deafness due to previous meningitis
Residual:
_______________________________________________________________________________
Cause:
__________________________________________________________________________________
Codes: ________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Reporting same diagnosis code more
than once
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 12.
Reporting same diagnosis code more than once
Each unique ICD-10-CM diagnosis code may be reported only once
for an encounter. This applies to bilateral conditions when there are
no distinct codes identifying laterality or two different conditions
classified to the same ICD-10-CM diagnosis code.
If the medical documentation indicates that the patient has two
different conditions that are both included in one diagnosis code,
report the diagnosis code only once.
Although each diagnosis code may be reported only once per
encounter, each code can be reported more than once per patient. For
example, a patient presents on Tuesday for an office visit and the
diagnosis is pneumonia. The physician prescribes antibiotics for 10
days. The patient returns 5 days later, stating that she has not
improved. The physician orders a culture and, based on the culture,
orders a different antibiotic. The medical necessity for all services to
this patient was the pneumonia diagnosis.
Laterality
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.B. 13.
Laterality
Some ICD-10-CM codes indicate laterality, specifying whether the
condition occurs on the left, right or is bilateral. If no bilateral code is
provided and the condition is bilateral, assign separate codes for both
the left and right side. If the side is not identified in the medical
record, assign the code for the unspecified side.
When a patient has a bilateral condition and each side is treated
during separate encounters, assign the “bilateral” code (as the
condition still exists on both sides), including for the encounter to
treat the first side. For the second encounter for treatment after one
side has previously been treated and the condition no longer exists on
that side, assign the appropriate unilateral code for the side where the
condition still exists (e.g., cataract surgery performed on each eye in
separate encounters). The bilateral code would not be assigned for the
subsequent encounter, as the patient no longer has the condition in
the previously-treated site. If the treatment on the first side did not
completely resolve the condition, then the bilateral code would still
be appropriate.
Some body parts and organs occur in pairs; for example, kidneys,
femurs, and femoral arteries. Other body parts and organs are
singular in physiology; for example, bladder, spine, and aorta.
Laterality refers to paired organs. Unilateral means one side of a pair,
and bilateral means both sides of a pair. Laterality is an important
concept in diagnostic coding because it can help define the scope of
the disorder.
For some organs, laterality is addressed in only part of the ICD-10-
CM classification. Laterality is not a component for code selection in
pneumonia, but laterality is a component for code selection for
neoplasms of the lung.
Laterality is usually straightforward, but as you become more adept
at coding, you will see that there are some complex laterality
situations. For example, the spine is a unilateral body part, but for
some vertebral procedures, laterality is reported because the
procedure can be performed on right, left, or both sides of the
individual vertebra.
In the I-10, left and right (laterality) are indicated by the final
character. For example, 
Fig. 4-4
 illustrates M70.84, soft tissue disorder
related to overuse or pressure to the hand. The right hand is
designated with character “1,” the left hand is indicated by “2,” and
unspecified hand is indicated with “9.” If the service was provided to
both hands, assign a code for the right hand and another code for the
left hand.
 
FIGURE 4–4
Laterality of codes in I-10.
In other instances, bilaterality can be reported with a single code,
for example, H52.22 Regular astigmatism (see 
Fig. 4-5
).
 
FIGURE 4–5
Bilaterality of codes in ICD-10.
TOOLBOX 4-1
 
Marilyn is a 56-year-old female who is employed as a data entry
specialist at the location hospital. Her job requires her to utilize a
computer keyboard for extended periods of time frequently
throughout the day. During an office visit to her primary care
provider, she complains of pain in her hands that wakes her up at
night. She is diagnosed with bilateral overuse soft tissue disorder of
her hands. Her physician has prescribed a splint to immobilize her
hands.
Question
Using 
Fig. 4-4
, which I-10 code or codes would you report for this
office visit? ______________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 4, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 A dash (-) at the end of an Alphabetic Index entry indicates what
requirement? __________
2 Instructional notes are included in what list? __________
3 Section IV of the ICD-10-CM Official Guidelines for Coding and
Reporting is for what type of coding? __________
4 Locating terms in the Alphabetic Index must be verified with codes
in what list? __________
5 How many characters are possible in ICD-10-CM coding?
__________
6 Dehydration with pneumonia is not considered an ___________ part
of a disease process.
7 When a “code first” note is indicated and the patient has an
underlying condition documented, which is listed as the principle or
first-listed diagnosis? __________
8 When a condition is described as both acute and chronic with
separate subentries in the Alphabetic Index at the same indention
level, which is coded first? __________
9 When one code can identify two diagnoses or a diagnosis with an
associated complication it is considered what type of code?
__________
10 What type of diagnosis codes do you report when the acute phase
of an illness or injury has passed but residual remains? __________
11 Reference the __________ _____ to determine if the condition has a
subentry term for “impending”
12 How many times are you able to report each specific ICD-10-CM
code per encounter? __________
13 Laterality refers to what type of organs? __________
Chapter 4, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, answer the following:
1 Select the four cooperating parties that agree on coding principles:
a National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS)
b Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
c American Hospital Association (AHA)
d American Health Information Management
Association (AHIMA)
e AAPC
f Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs)
g Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS)
2 Fill in the missing words in the Steps to Accurate Coding:
a Identify the main ____________ in the
diagnostic statement.
b Locate the main term(s) in the ____________
Index.
c Review any ____________ under the main
term in the Index.
d Follow any ____________ ____________
instructions, such as 
see also.
e Verify the code(s) selected from the Index
(Volume ____________) in the Tabular List
(Volume ____________) (referred to in this
text as the Tabular).
f Refer to any instructional notations in the
____________.
g Assign codes to the highest level of
____________. For example, if a fourth digit is
available, you cannot assign only a three-
digit code, and if a fifth digit is available, you
cannot assign only a four-digit code.
h Code the diagnosis until all ____________ are
completely identified.
3 A combination code is a single code used to classify ____________.
a two diagnoses
b a diagnosis with an associated manifestation
c a diagnosis with an associated complication
d all of the above
4 Additional signs and symptoms that may not routinely be associated
with the disease process being reported should be coded when
present.
True   False
5 In the outpatient setting, an impending condition should be coded
as if it actually exists.
True   False
6 When separate codes exist to identify acute and chronic conditions,
the chronic code is sequenced first.
True   False
7 It is acceptable to use only the Alphabetic Index to assign I-10 codes.
True   False
8 When sequencing codes for residuals and late effects, the residual is
sequenced first followed by a late effect code.
True   False
9 A code is invalid if it has not been coded to the full number of
characters available for that code.
True   False
10 The 
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
 are updated
annually.
True   False
Chapter 4, part II, practical
Match the diagnoses to the appropriate symptoms:
11 colicky pain __________
a kidney stones
b pneumonia
c both
12 hematuria __________
13 fever __________
14 cough __________
15 pyuria __________
16 chills __________
17 chest pain __________
18 nausea and vomiting __________
19 oliguria __________
20 dysuria __________
21 sputum production __________
22 abdominal distention __________
Assign I-10 codes to the following diagnoses:
23 Acute and chronic prostatitis
Codes: ________________, ________________
24 Headache, stiff neck, and fever due to viral meningitis
Code: ________________
25 Acute and chronic pyelonephritis
Codes: ________________, ________________
26 Abdominal pain due to acute and chronic cholecystitis
Code: ________________
27 Urinary tract infection due to 
Proteus mirabilis
Codes: ________________, ________________
28 Cerebrovascular accident, TIA
Code: ________________
29 Traumatic osteoarthritis of the wrist due to fracture 5 years ago
Codes: ________________, ________________
30 Dysphagia due to previous cerebrovascular accident, nontraumatic
Code: ________________
31 Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection
Code: ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 5
Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-
10-CM chapters 1-10)
 
“Because the structure of ICD-10 is more specific and the codes look
different, the mindset has to change. Documentation must be even
more detailed than before.”
Letitia Patterson, MPA, CPC, CCS-P
Consultant
 
A Coder’s Resource
 
Chicago, Illinois
CHAPTER TOPICS
Certain Infectious and Parasitic Diseases
Neoplasms
Diseases of the Blood and Blood-Forming Organs and Certain
Disorders Involving the Immune Mechanism
Endocrine, Nutritional, and Metabolic Diseases
Mental, Behavioral and Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Diseases of the Nervous System
Diseases of the Eye and Adnexa
Diseases of the Ear and Mastoid Process
Diseases of the Circulatory System
Diseases of the Respiratory System
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Review certain infectious and parasitic disease codes.
2 
Analyze neoplasm codes.
3 
Assess the blood and blood-forming organs and certain disorders
involving the immune mechanism codes.
4 
Examine the endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases codes.
5 
Understand the mental, behavioral and neurodevelopmental
disorder codes.
6 
Examine the diseases of the nervous system codes.
7 
Analyze the diseases of the eye and adnexa codes.
8 
Comprehend the organization and reporting of the ear and mastoid
process codes.
9 
Recognize the diseases of the circulatory system codes.
10 
Evaluate the diseases of the respiratory system codes.
11 
Demonstrate the ability to report diagnoses with I-10 codes for
Chapters 1-10Chapter 1Chapter 2Chapter 3Chapter 4Chapter
6Chapter 7Chapter 8Chapter 9Chapter 10.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Certain infectious and parasitic
diseases
Chapter 1
 in the I-10 Tabular is Certain Infectious and Parasitic
Diseases (A00-B99), which classifies diseases according to the etiology
(cause) of the disease. Because infectious and parasitic conditions can
affect various parts of the body, the chapter contains a wide variety of
codes and complex terminology.
In this chapter there are many instances of combination coding and
multiple coding. Remember: 
Combination coding
 is when one code
fully describes the conditions and/or manifestations. 
Multiple coding
is when it takes more than one code to fully describe the condition,
circumstance, or manifestation, and then sequencing of multiple codes
is considered.
Examples
Combination coding
Diagnosis:
Candidiasis infection of the mouth
Index:
Candidiasis,
 candidal, mouth B37.0
Tabular:
B37.0 Candidal stomatitis
Code:
B37.0 Candidiasis infection of the mouth
B37.0 fully describes the diagnosis.
Multiple coding
Diagnosis:
Urinary tract infection due to 
Escherichia coli (E. coli)
Index:
Infection,
 infected, infective; urinary (tract) NEC N39.0
Tabular:
N39.0 Urinary tract infection, site not specified
Use additional code (B95-B97), to identify infectious agent.
Code N39.0 does not fully describe the condition. The instructions
in the Tabular for code N39.0 state that you are to also code the
organism causing the urinary tract infection. To locate a causative
organism, you locate the main term “Infection” in the Index and then
the subterm of “bacterial” followed by the subterm “as cause of
disease classified elsewhere,” and then the specific organism, which
in the example is 
Escherichia coli.
Index:
Infection,
 bacterial, as cause of disease classified elsewhere, Escherichia coli -- See also Escherichia coli B96.20
Tabular:
B96 Other bacterial agents as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B96.20 
Escherichia coli [E. coli] 
as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
The urinary tract infection is sequenced first, followed by the
bacterial organism.
Codes:
N39.0, B96.20 Urinary tract infection due to 
Escherichia coli (E. coli)
Multiple coding is necessary to fully describe the infection of the
urinary tract and the causative organism, 
E. coli.
Resistant infections
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.
Chapter-specific coding guidelines
1.c. Infections resistant to antibiotics
Many bacterial infections are resistant to current antibiotics. It is
necessary to identify all infections documented as antibiotic resistant.
Assign a code from category Z16, Resistance to antimicrobial drugs,
following the infection code only if the infection code does not
identify drug resistance.
A codes (A00-A99)
The A codes include the blocks illustrated in 
Fig. 5-1
.
 
FIGURE 5–1
Blocks in the A codes of the I-10.
Antibiotics are used to kill the bacteria that cause disease, but many
antibiotics that were historically effective against bacteria are no
longer effective. Most bacteria have become resistant to some
antibiotics, but other bacteria are resistant to many antibiotics
(multiresistant organisms, MROs, or superbugs). Those antibiotics
that have been widely prescribed are no longer effective—for
example, methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus
 (MRSA), multi-
drug-resistant 
Mycobacterium
 tuberculosis (MDR-TB), and
vancomycin-resistant 
Enterococcus
 (VRE). Penicillin-resistant
Streptococcus pneumonia
 has also increased worldwide. When
reporting an infection that is antibiotic resistant, report the infection
first followed by Z16.- (Infection with drug-resistant microorganism).
This is the mechanism by which drug-resistant microorganisms are
tracked. 
Staphylococcus aureus
 is the exception to the Z16.- rule. For
Staphylococcus aureus
, specific codes designate the status of resistance
to methicillin:
B95.61
Methicillin susceptible Staphylococcus aureus infection as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere (MSSA)
B95.62
Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere (MRSA)
 
QUICK CHECK 5-1
1. 
What category code would you reference when reporting MRSA?
___________________
2. 
What is the drug resistance in VRE? ___________________
3. 
What does the S stand for in MRSA? ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock
Sepsis
 is an inflammatory condition in response to microorganisms in
the tissue, blood, lungs, skin, or urinary system. SIRS (systemic
inflammatory response syndrome) is diagnosed when two or more of
the following are present:
■
 
hypothermia or fever (<97°F or >100°F or <38°C or >36°C)
■
 
tachycardia (>90-100 bpm)
■
 
increased respiratory rate (>20 breaths per minute or PaCO
2
 < 32
mm Hg)
■
 
increased or decreased white blood count (<4000 or >12,000)
Severe sepsis
 represents a systemic response to organ dysfunction,
hypotension, or collection of fluids in the tissues (hypoperfusion). To
report severe sepsis, you would report a code from subcategory R65.2
but remember that severe sepsis can only be reported if severe sepsis
is documented in the patient health record. The provider will make
the diagnosis of SIRS. If the documentation indicates that the patient
has SIRS and organ dysfunction and that the organ dysfunction is
related to a condition other than SIRS, severe sepsis is not reported.
There must be a documented correlation between the SIRS and the
organ dysfunction to report severe sepsis. It will require at least three
codes to report severe sepsis: a code for the underlying systemic
infection, a code from subcategory R65.2, and a code or codes to
report organ dysfunction. When the microorganism is not
documented, report A41.9, Sepsis, unspecified.
Septic shock
 is a circulatory failure that represents a type of organ
dysfunction. Report the underlying infection first, followed by R65.21,
Severe sepsis with septic shock, and codes for any organ dysfunction
documented in the health record. Code R65.21 is never assigned as the
first-listed diagnosis because it is a result of an underlying infection;
therefore, the infection is the first-listed diagnosis followed by the
severe sepsis.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C. 1.d.
Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock
2) 
Septic shock
(a) 
Septic shock generally refers to circulatory
failure associated with severe sepsis, and
therefore, it represents a type of acute organ
dysfunction.
For cases of septic shock, the code for the systemic
infection should be sequenced first, followed by
code R65.21, Severe sepsis with septic shock or
code T81.12, Postprocedural septic shock. Any
additional codes for the other acute organ
dysfunctions should also be assigned. As noted
in the sequencing instructions in the Tabular
List, the code for septic shock cannot be
assigned as a principal diagnosis.
Septic shock indicates the presence of severe
sepsis. Code R65.21, Severe sepsis with septic
shock, must be assigned if septic shock is
documented in the medical record, even if the
term severe sepsis is not documented.
3) 
Sequencing of severe sepsis
If severe sepsis is present on admission, and
meets the definition of principal diagnosis, the
underlying systemic infection should be
assigned as principal diagnosis followed by the
appropriate code from subcategory R65.2 as
required by the sequencing rules in the Tabular
List. A code from subcategory R65.2 can never
be assigned as a principal diagnosis.
When severe sepsis develops during an encounter
(it was not present on admission) the
underlying systemic infection and the
appropriate code from subcategory R65.2
should be assigned as secondary diagnoses.
Severe sepsis may be present on admission but
the diagnosis may not be confirmed until
sometime after admission. If the documentation
is not clear whether severe sepsis was present
on admission, the provider should be queried.
SIRS
 may develop as a result of a procedure and becomes a
complication of the medical care the patient received. In these
instances, report a postprocedural infection first, followed by a code
for the specific infection.
Examples
• 
Subcategory T80.2 Infections following infusion, transfusion, or
therapeutic injection, report an additional code to identify the
specific infection; such as sepsis [A41.9]
• 
Subcategory T81.4- Infection following a procedure; report an
additional code to identify infection
• 
Subcategory O86.0 Infection of obstetric surgical wound, report an
additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C. 1.d.
Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock
1) 
Coding of Sepsis and Severe Sepsis
(a) 
Sepsis
For a diagnosis of sepsis, assign the appropriate
code for the underlying systemic infection. If
the type of infection or causal organism is not
further specified, assign code A41.9, Sepsis,
unspecified organism.
A code from subcategory R65.2, Severe sepsis,
should not be assigned unless severe sepsis or
an associated acute organ dysfunction is
documented.
(i) 
Negative or inconclusive blood cultures and
sepsis
Negative or inconclusive blood cultures do not
preclude a diagnosis of sepsis in patients with
clinical evidence of the condition, however, the
provider should be queried.
(ii) 
Urosepsis
The term urosepsis is a nonspecific term. It is not
to be considered synonymous with sepsis. It
has no default code in the Alphabetic Index.
Should a provider use this term, he/she must be
queried for clarification.
(iii) 
Sepsis with organ dysfunction
If a patient has sepsis and associated acute organ
dysfunction or multiple organ dysfunction
(MOD), follow the instructions for coding
severe sepsis.
(iv) 
Acute organ dysfunction that is not clearly
associated with the sepsis
If a patient has sepsis and an acute organ
dysfunction, but the medical record
documentation indicates that the acute organ
dysfunction is related to a medical condition
other than the sepsis, do not assign a code from
subcategory R65.2, Severe sepsis. An acute
organ dysfunction must be associated with the
sepsis in order to assign the severe sepsis code.
If the documentation is not clear as to whether
an acute organ dysfunction is related to the
sepsis or another medical condition, query the
provider.
(b) 
Severe sepsis
The coding of severe sepsis requires a minimum
of 2 codes: first a code for the underlying
systemic infection, followed by a code from
subcategory R65.2, Severe sepsis. If the causal
organism is not documented, assign code
A41.9, Sepsis, unspecified organism, for the
infection. Additional code(s) for the associated
acute organ dysfunction are also required.
Due to the complex nature of severe sepsis, some
cases may require querying the provider prior
to assignment of the codes.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C. 1.d.
Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock
4) 
Sepsis and severe sepsis with a localized infection
If the reason for admission is both sepsis or severe
sepsis and a localized infection, such as
pneumonia or cellulitis, a code(s) for the
underlying systemic infection should be
assigned first and the code for the localized
infection should be assigned as a secondary
diagnosis. If the patient has severe sepsis, a
code from subcategory R65.2 should also be
assigned as a secondary diagnosis. If the patient
is admitted with a localized infection, such as
pneumonia, and sepsis/severe sepsis doesn’t
develop until after admission, the localized
infection should be assigned first, followed by
the appropriate sepsis/severe sepsis codes.
5) 
Sepsis due to a postprocedural infection
(a) 
Documentation of causal relationship
As with all postprocedural complications, code
assignment is based on the provider’s
documentation of the relationship between the
infection and the procedure.
(b) 
Sepsis due to a postprocedural infection
For such cases, the postprocedural infection code,
such as, T80.2, Infections following infusion,
transfusion, and therapeutic injection, T81.4,
Infection following a procedure, T88.0, Infection
following immunization, or O86.0, Infection of
obstetric surgical wound, should be coded first,
followed by the code for the specific infection. If
the patient has severe sepsis the appropriate
code from subcategory R65.2 should also be
assigned with the additional code(s) for any
acute organ dysfunction.
(c) 
Postprocedural infection and postprocedural
septic shock
In cases where a postprocedural infection has
occurred and has resulted in severe sepsis and
postprocedural septic shock, the code for the
precipitating complication such as code T81.4,
Infection following a procedure, or O86.0,
Infection of obstetrical surgical wound should
be coded first followed by code R65.20, Severe
sepsis without septic shock. A code for the
systemic infection should also be assigned.
If a postprocedural infection has resulted in
postprocedural septic shock, the code for the
precipitating complication such as code T81.4,
Infection following a procedure, or O86.0,
Infection of obstetrical surgical wound should
be coded first followed by code T81.12-,
Postprocedural septic shock. A code for the
systemic infection should also be assigned.
6) 
Sepsis and severe sepsis associated with a noninfectious process
(condition)
In some cases a noninfectious process (condition),
such as trauma, may lead to an infection which
can result in sepsis or severe sepsis. If sepsis or
severe sepsis is documented as associated with
a noninfectious condition, such as a burn or
serious injury, and this condition meets the
definition for principal diagnosis, the code for
the noninfectious condition should be
sequenced first, followed by the code for the
resulting infection. If severe sepsis, is present a
code from subcategory R65.2 should also be
assigned with any associated organ
dysfunction(s) codes. It is not necessary to
assign a code from subcategory R65.1, Systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) of
non-infectious origin, for these cases.
If the infection meets the definition of principal
diagnosis it should be sequenced before the
non-infectious condition. When both the
associated non-infectious condition and the
infection meet the definition of principal
diagnosis either may be assigned as principal
diagnosis.
Only one code from category R65, Symptoms and
signs specifically associated with systemic
inflammation and infection, should be assigned.
Therefore, when a non-infectious condition
leads to an infection resulting in severe sepsis,
assign the appropriate code from subcategory
R65.2, Severe sepsis. Do not additionally assign
a code from subcategory R65.1, Systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) of
non-infectious origin.
See Section I.C.18. SIRS due to non-infectious process
TOOLBOX 5-1
 
Robert has sepsis resulting from a postprocedural infection that is
now complicating his care.
Questions
1. 
Sepsis resulting from a postprocedural infection is considered a
______________________________.
2. 
If the documentation stated that Robert’s sepsis was severe, you
would reference what subcategory for code assignment?
______________________________
3. 
When reporting severe sepsis, you would also report what
dysfunction? ______________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
B codes (B00-B99)
The B codes include viral infections, mycoses (fungi), protozoal
(microscopic animals), helminthiases (parasitic worms), pediculosis
(louse), acariasis (mites), sequelae of infectious disease, and other
infectious agents. The B codes are illustrated in 
Fig. 5-2
. Common
infectious categories within the B codes are herpes (B00), chickenpox
(B01), herpes zoster (shingles, B02), measles (B05), and German
measles (Rubella, B06).
 
FIGURE 5–2
Blocks in the B codes of the I-10.
Viral hepatitis
Viral hepatitis is reported with codes in the B15-B19 range, which are
divided based on with or without hepatic coma and the type of
hepatitis. For example, B15 reports acute hepatitis A and B16 reports
acute hepatitis B.
■
 
Hepatitis A
 (HAV) was formerly called epidemic, infectious, short-
incubation, or acute catarrhal jaundice hepatitis, and the primary
transmission mode is the oral–fecal route.
■
 
Hepatitis B
 (HBV) was formerly called long-incubation period,
serum, or homologous serum hepatitis. Transmission modes are
through blood from infected persons and from body fluids of
infected mother to neonate.
■
 
Hepatitis C
 (HCV), caused by the hepatitis C virus and is primarily
transfusion associated.
■
 
Hepatitis D
 (HDV), also called delta hepatitis and is caused by the
hepatitis D virus in patients formerly or currently infected with
hepatitis B.
■
 
Hepatitis E
 (HEV) is also called enterically transmitted non-A, non-
B hepatitis. The primary transmission mode is the oral–fecal route,
usually through contaminated water.
EXERCISE 5-1
A Code Infectious and Parasitic Diseases
Code the following infectious diseases:
1 
Viral gastroenteritis
Code: ____________________
2 
Severe sepsis due to 
Pseudomonas
 with septic shock
Codes: ____________________,
____________________
3 
Acute poliomyelitis
Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Human immunodeficiency
B20 reports human immunodeficiency virus diseases and includes
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), which is caused by
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus). HIV affects certain white
blood cells (T-4 lymphocytes) and destroys the ability of the cells to
fight infections, making patients susceptible to a host of infectious
diseases (e.g., 
Pneumocystis carinii
 pneumonia [PCP], Kaposi’s
sarcoma, and lymphoma). AIDS-related complex (ARC) is an
outdated term for lesser infections associated with HIV. Additional
code(s) are reported to identify all the manifestations of AIDS. It is
extremely important that only confirmed HIV cases are reported. The
assignment of the AIDS code prior to confirmation may cause the
patient many unwarranted problems if the patient does not have
AIDS. Confirmation does not mean that a serology or culture for HIV
is positive, but rather that the physician has documented that the
patient is HIV positive or has HIV-related illnesses.
If the encounter is for an HIV-related condition, the first-listed
diagnosis is B20 with additional codes to report the HIV-related
condition(s). If the encounter is for an HIV-disease patient for other
than the HIV or an HIV-related condition, the reason for the
encounter is the first-listed diagnosis followed by B20. There are times
when a patient is documented to be HIV-positive based on serology or
culture but has no symptoms. Report this asymptomatic HIV status
with Z21, Asymptomatic HIV status. However, once a patient has
AIDS, report B20; never report R75 (inconclusive) or Z21
(asymptomatic). If the patient is known to have been exposed to HIV
but has not tested positive for HIV and has no HIV symptoms, report
Z20.6. If the serology for HIV is inconclusive, report R75.
If an HIV-positive patient is pregnant and the encounter is for an
HIV-related illness, the first-listed diagnosis is O98.7, HIV disease
complicating pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium, followed by
B20 and codes for the HIV-related illness. If the patient’s status is
asymptomatic HIV, report O98.7 and Z21 (asymptomatic HIV).
If the patient presents for HIV testing, report Z11.4, Encounter for
screening for HIV. Additional codes may be assigned for any known
high-risk behavior, such as:
■
 
Z72.51
High risk heterosexual behavior
■
 
Z72.52
High risk homosexual behavior
■
 
Z72.53
High risk bisexual behavior
If the patient has signs or symptoms when presenting for HIV
screening, report the signs and symptoms and if counseling is
provided during the encounter, report Z71.7, HIV counseling. When
the patient returns for the results of the HIV screening and the results
are negative, report Z71.7.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.1.
Chapter 1
: certain infectious and parasitic diseases (a00-
b99)
a. 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infections
1) 
Code only confirmed cases
 
Code only confirmed cases of HIV
infection/illness. This is an exception to the
hospital inpatient guideline Section II, H.
In this context, “confirmation” does not require
documentation of positive serology or culture
for HIV; the provider’s diagnostic statement
that the patient is HIV positive, or has an HIV-
related illness is sufficient.
2) 
Selection and sequencing of HIV codes
(a) 
Patient admitted for HIV-related condition
If a patient is admitted for an HIV-related
condition, the principal diagnosis should be
B20, Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]
disease followed by additional diagnosis codes
for all reported HIV-related conditions.
(b) 
Patient with HIV disease admitted for
unrelated condition
If a patient with HIV disease is admitted for an
unrelated condition (such as a traumatic
injury), the code for the unrelated condition
(e.g., the nature of injury code) should be the
principal diagnosis. Other diagnoses would be
B20 followed by additional diagnosis codes for
all reported HIV-related conditions.
(c) 
Whether the patient is newly diagnosed
Whether the patient is newly diagnosed or has
had previous admissions/encounters for HIV
conditions is irrelevant to the sequencing
decision.
(d) 
Asymptomatic human immunodeficiency
virus
Z21, Asymptomatic human immunodeficiency
virus [HIV] infection status, is to be applied
when the patient without any documentation of
symptoms is listed as being “HIV positive,”
“known HIV,” “HIV test positive,” or similar
terminology. Do not use this code if the term
“AIDS” is used or if the patient is treated for
any HIV-related illness or is described as
having any condition(s) resulting from his/her
HIV positive status; use B20 in these cases.
(e) 
Patients with inconclusive HIV serology
Patients with inconclusive HIV serology, but no
definitive diagnosis or manifestations of the
illness, may be assigned code R75, Inconclusive
laboratory evidence of human
immunodeficiency virus [HIV].
(f) 
Previously diagnosed HIV-related illness
Patients with any known prior diagnosis of an
HIV-related illness should be coded to B20.
Once a patient has developed an HIV-related
illness, the patient should always be assigned
code B20 on every subsequent
admission/encounter. Patients previously
diagnosed with any HIV illness (B20) should
never be assigned to R75 or Z21, Asymptomatic
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection
status.
(Note from author: State laws may have rules for coding and submitting
AIDS diagnosis. Example: Under New York State Law, confidential HIV-
related information can only be given to people the patient allows to have it
by signing a written release or to people who need to know the HIV status in
order to provide medical care and services.)
(g) 
HIV Infection in Pregnancy, Childbirth and the Puerperium
During pregnancy, childbirth or the puerperium,
a patient admitted (or presenting for a health
care encounter) because of an HIV-related
illness should receive a principal diagnosis code
of O98.7-, Human immunodeficiency [HIV]
disease complicating pregnancy, childbirth and
the puerperium, followed by B20 and the
code(s) for the HIV-related illness(es). Codes
from 
Chapter 15
 always take sequencing
priority.
Patients with asymptomatic HIV infection status
admitted (or presenting for a health care
encounter) during pregnancy, childbirth, or the
puerperium should receive codes of O98.7- and
Z21.
(h) 
Encounters for testing for HIV
If a patient is being seen to determine his/her HIV
status, use code Z11.4, Encounter for screening
for human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]. Use
additional codes for any associated high risk
behavior.
If a patient with signs or symptoms is being seen
for HIV testing, code the signs and symptoms.
An additional counseling code Z71.7, Human
immunodeficiency virus [HIV] counseling, may
be used if counseling is provided during the
encounter for the test.
When a patient returns to be informed of his/her
HIV test results and the test result is negative,
use code Z71.7, Human immunodeficiency
virus [HIV] counseling.
If the results are positive, see previous guidelines
and assign codes as appropriate.
EXERCISE 5-2
B Code Viral Infections
Code the following viral diseases:
1 
Candidal vaginal infection
Code: ___________________
2 
Post-chickenpox myelitis
Code: ___________________
3 
Unspecified parvovirus infection
Code: ___________________
4 
Oral thrush
Code: ___________________
5 
Body louse (pediculosis) infestation
Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Neoplasms
Chapter 2
 of the I-10 contains codes C00-D49 to report neoplasms.
There are extensive Guidelines that must be understood and followed
to correctly code neoplasms.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.2.
Chapter 2
: neoplasms (C00-D49)
General guidelines
Chapter 2
 of the ICD-10-CM contains the codes for most benign
and all malignant neoplasms. Certain benign neoplasms, such as
prostatic adenomas, may be found in the specific body system
chapters. To properly code a neoplasm it is necessary to determine
from the record if the neoplasm is benign, in-situ, malignant, or of
uncertain histologic behavior. If malignant, any secondary
(metastatic) sites should also be determined.
Primary malignant neoplasms overlapping site boundaries
A primary malignant neoplasm that overlaps two or more contiguous
(next to each other) sites should be classified to the
subcategory/code.8 (‘overlapping lesion’), unless the combination is
specifically indexed elsewhere. For multiple neoplasms of the same
site that are not contiguous such as tumors in different quadrants of
the same breast, codes for each site should be assigned.
Malignant neoplasm of ectopic tissue
Malignant neoplasms of ectopic tissue are to be coded to the site of
origin mentioned, e.g., ectopic pancreatic malignant neoplasms
involving the stomach are coded to pancreas, unspecified (C25.9).
The neoplasm table in the Alphabetic Index should be referenced
first. However, if the histological term is documented, that term
should be referenced first, rather than going immediately to the
Neoplasm Table, in order to determine which column in the
Neoplasm Table is appropriate. For example, if the documentation
indicates “adenoma,” refer to the term in the Alphabetic Index to
review the entries under this term and the instructional note to “see
also neoplasm, by site, benign.” The table provides the proper code
based on the type of neoplasm and the site. It is important to select
the proper column in the table that corresponds to the type of
neoplasm. The Tabular List should then be referenced to verify that
the correct code has been selected from the table and that a more
specific site code does not exist.
See Section I.C.21. Factors influencing health status and contact with
health services, Status, for information regarding Z15.0, codes for genetic
susceptibility to cancer.
a. 
Treatment directed at the malignancy
If the treatment is directed at the malignancy,
designate the malignancy as the principal
diagnosis.
The only exception to this guideline is if a patient
admission/encounter is solely for the
administration of chemotherapy,
immunotherapy or radiation therapy, assign
the appropriate Z51.-- code as the first-listed or
principal diagnosis, and the diagnosis or
problem for which the service is being
performed as a secondary diagnosis.
b. 
Treatment of secondary site
When a patient is admitted because of a primary
neoplasm with metastasis and treatment is
directed toward the secondary site only, the
secondary neoplasm is designated as the
principal diagnosis even though the primary
malignancy is still present.
c. 
Coding and sequencing of complications
Coding and sequencing of complications
associated with the malignancies or with the
therapy thereof are subject to the following
guidelines:
1) 
Anemia associated with malignancy
When admission/encounter is for management of
an anemia associated with the malignancy, and
the treatment is only for anemia, the
appropriate code for the malignancy is
sequenced as the principal or first-listed
diagnosis followed by the appropriate code for
anemia (such as code D63.0, Anemia in
neoplastic disease).
2) 
Anemia associated with chemotherapy,
immunotherapy and radiation therapy
When the admission/encounter is for
management of an anemia associated with an
adverse effect of the administration of
chemotherapy or immunotherapy and the only
treatment is for the anemia, the anemia code is
sequenced first followed by the appropriate
codes for the neoplasm and the adverse effect
(T45.1X5, Adverse effect of antineoplastic and
immunosuppressive drugs).
When the admission/encounter is for
management of an anemia associated with an
adverse effect of radiotherapy, the anemia code
should be sequenced first, followed by the
appropriate neoplasm code and code Y84.2,
Radiological procedure and radiotherapy as the
cause of abnormal reaction of the patient, or of
later complication, without mention of
misadventure at the time of the procedure.
3) 
Management of dehydration due to the
malignancy
When the admission/encounter is for
management of dehydration due to the
malignancy and only the dehydration is being
treated (intravenous rehydration), the
dehydration is sequenced first, followed by the
code(s) for the malignancy.
4) 
Treatment of a complication resulting from a
surgical procedure
When the admission/encounter is for treatment of
a complication resulting from a surgical
procedure, designate the complication as the
principal or first-listed diagnosis if treatment is
directed at resolving the complication.
d. 
Primary malignancy previously excised
When a primary malignancy has been previously
excised or eradicated from its site and there is
no further treatment directed to that site and
there is no evidence of any existing primary
malignancy, a code from category Z85, Personal
history of malignant neoplasm, should be used
to indicate the former site of the malignancy.
Any mention of extension, invasion, or
metastasis to another site is coded as a
secondary malignant neoplasm to that site. The
secondary site may be the principal or first-
listed with the Z85 code used as a secondary
code.
e. 
Admissions/Encounters involving chemotherapy, immunotherapy
and radiation therapy
1) 
Episode of care involves surgical removal of
neoplasm
When an episode of care involves the surgical
removal of a neoplasm, primary or secondary
site, followed by adjunct chemotherapy or
radiation treatment during the same episode of
care, the code for the neoplasm should be
assigned as principal or first-listed diagnosis.
2) 
Patient admission/encounter solely for
administration of chemotherapy,
immunotherapy and radiation therapy
If a patient admission/encounter is solely for the
administration of chemotherapy,
immunotherapy or radiation therapy assign
code Z51.0, Encounter for antineoplastic
radiation therapy, or Z51.11, Encounter for
antineoplastic chemotherapy, or Z51.12,
Encounter for antineoplastic immunotherapy as
the first-listed or principal diagnosis. If a
patient receives more than one of these
therapies during the same admission more than
one of these codes may be assigned, in any
sequence.
The malignancy for which the therapy is being
administered should be assigned as a
secondary diagnosis.
3) 
Patient admitted for radiation therapy,
chemotherapy or immunotherapy and
develops complications
When a patient is admitted for the purpose of
radiotherapy, immunotherapy or
chemotherapy and develops complications
such as uncontrolled nausea and vomiting or
dehydration, the principal or first-listed
diagnosis is Z51.0, Encounter for antineoplastic
radiation therapy, or Z51.11, Encounter for
antineoplastic chemotherapy, or Z51.12,
Encounter for antineoplastic immunotherapy
followed by any codes for the complications.
f. 
Admission/encounter to determine extent of malignancy
When the reason for admission/encounter is to
determine the extent of the malignancy, or for a
procedure such as paracentesis or thoracentesis,
the primary malignancy or appropriate
metastatic site is designated as the principal or
first-listed diagnosis, even though
chemotherapy or radiotherapy is administered.
g. 
Symptoms, signs, and abnormal findings listed in
 
Chapter 18
associated with neoplasms
Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions listed
in 
Chapter 18
 characteristic of, or associated
with, an existing primary or secondary site
malignancy cannot be used to replace the
malignancy as principal or first-listed
diagnosis, regardless of the number of
admissions or encounters for treatment and
care of the neoplasm.
See section I.C.21
. 
Factors influencing health status
and contact with health services, Encounter for
prophylactic organ removal.
h. 
Admission/encounter for pain control/management
See Section I.C.6. for information on coding
admission/encounter for pain control/management.
i. 
Malignancy in two or more noncontiguous sites
A patient may have more than one malignant
tumor in the same organ. These tumors may
represent different primaries or metastatic
disease, depending on the site. Should the
documentation be unclear, the provider should
be queried as to the status of each tumor so that
the correct codes can be assigned.
j. 
Disseminated malignant neoplasm, unspecified
Code C80.0, Disseminated malignant neoplasm,
unspecified, is for use only in those cases where
the patient has advanced metastatic disease and
no known primary or secondary sites are
specified. It should not be used in place of
assigning codes for the primary site and all
known secondary sites.
k. 
Malignant neoplasm without specification of site
Code C80.1, Malignant (primary) neoplasm,
unspecified, equates to Cancer, unspecified.
This code should only be used when no
determination can be made as to the primary
site of a malignancy. This code should rarely be
used in the inpatient setting.
l. 
Sequencing of neoplasm codes
1) 
Encounter for treatment of primary
malignancy
If the reason for the encounter is for treatment of a
primary malignancy, assign the malignancy as
the principal/first-listed diagnosis. The primary
site is to be sequenced first, followed by any
metastatic sites.
2) 
Encounter for treatment of secondary
malignancy
When an encounter is for a primary malignancy
with metastasis and treatment is directed
toward the metastatic (secondary) site(s) only,
the metastatic site(s) is designated as the
principal/first-listed diagnosis. The primary
malignancy is coded as an additional code.
3) 
Malignant neoplasm in a pregnant patient
When a pregnant woman has a malignant
neoplasm, a code from subcategory O9A.1-,
Malignant neoplasm complicating pregnancy,
childbirth, and the puerperium, should be
sequenced first, followed by the appropriate
code from 
Chapter 2
 to indicate the type of
neoplasm.
4) 
Encounter for complication associated with a
neoplasm
When an encounter is for management of a
complication associated with a neoplasm, such
as dehydration, and the treatment is only for
the complication, the complication is coded
first, followed by the appropriate code(s) for the
neoplasm.
The exception to this guideline is anemia. When
the admission/encounter is for management of
an anemia associated with malignancy, and the
treatment is only for anemia, the appropriate
code for the malignancy is sequenced as the
principal or first-listed diagnosis followed by
code D63.0, Anemia in neoplastic disease.
5) 
Complication from surgical procedure for
treatment of a neoplasm
When an encounter is for treatment of a
complication resulting from a surgical
procedure performed for the treatment of the
neoplasm, designate the complication as the
principal/first-listed diagnosis. See guideline
regarding the coding of a current malignancy
versus personal history to determine if the code
for the neoplasm should also be assigned.
6) 
Pathologic fracture due to a neoplasm
When an encounter is for a pathological fracture
due to a neoplasm, and the focus of treatment is
the fracture, a code from subcategory M84.5,
Pathological fracture in neoplastic disease,
should be sequenced first, followed by the code
for the neoplasm.
If the focus of treatment is the neoplasm with an
associated pathological fracture, the neoplasm
code should be sequenced first, followed by a
code from M84.5 for the pathological fracture.
m. 
Current malignancy versus personal history of malignancy
When a primary malignancy has been excised but
further treatment, such as an additional surgery
for the malignancy, radiation therapy or
chemotherapy is directed to that site, the
primary malignancy code should be used until
treatment is completed.
When a primary malignancy has been previously
excised or eradicated from its site, there is no
further treatment (of the malignancy) directed
to that site, and there is no evidence of any
existing primary malignancy, a code from
category Z85, Personal history of malignant
neoplasm, should be used to indicate the
former site of the malignancy.
See Section I.C.21. Factors influencing health status
and contact with health services, History (of)
n. 
Leukemia, Multiple Myeloma, and Malignant Plasma Cell
Neoplasms in remission versus personal history
The categories for leukemia, and category C90,
Multiple myeloma and malignant plasma cell
neoplasms, have codes indicating whether or
not the leukemia has achieved remission. There
are also codes Z85.6, Personal history of
leukemia, and Z85.79, Personal history of other
malignant neoplasms of lymphoid,
hematopoietic and related tissues. If the
documentation is unclear, as to whether the
leukemia has achieved remission, the provider
should be queried.
See Section I.C.21. Factors influencing health status
and contact with health services, History (of)
o. 
Aftercare following surgery for neoplasm
See Section I.C.21. Factors influencing health status
and contact with health services, Aftercare
p. 
Follow-up care for completed treatment of a malignancy
See Section I.C.21. Factors influencing health status
and contact with health services, Follow-up
q. 
Prophylactic organ removal for prevention of malignancy
See Section I.C. 21, Factors influencing health status
and contact with health services, Prophylactic organ
removal
r. 
Malignant neoplasm associated with transplanted organ
A malignant neoplasm of a transplanted organ
should be coded as a transplant complication.
Assign first the appropriate code from category
T86.-, Complications of transplanted organs
and tissue, followed by code C80.2, Malignant
neoplasm associated with transplanted organ.
Use an additional code for the specific
malignancy.
 
QUICK CHECK 5-2
1. 
According to the Neoplasm Guidelines, you would report a
category _____________ code for a patient in leukemia remission
and code _________________ for a personal history of leukemia.
2. 
When an encounter for a pathological fracture is due to a neoplasm,
and if the focus of treatment is the fracture, a code from subcategory
_____________ should be sequenced first, followed by the code for
the _______________.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Neoplasm classifications and staging
In the I-10, neoplasms are classified as:
■
 
C00-C96, Malignant:
 A cancerous tumor that grows worse over
time by invading surrounding tissue, is aggressive in manner, and
may metastasize.
Primary site: Original site of the tumor
Secondary site: Metastasized from the original site
■
 
D00-D09, Ca in situ (CIS):
 Latin for “in its place,” a cancerous
tumor in its original place that has not invaded surrounding tissues
■
 
D10-D3A, Benign:
 A tumor that does not invade surrounding
tissue, is not metastatic, and is not aggressive
■
 
D37-D48, Uncertain:
 A neoplasm that is not clearly benign or
malignant and over time may or may not become more aggressive
■
 
D49, Unspecified Behavior:
 A neoplasm of unspecified morphology
and behavior, such as growth NOS, neoplasm NOS, or tumor NOS.
This classification does not include neoplasm of uncertain behavior
(D37-D48).
The first step in assigning a code(s) for a neoplasm is to determine if
the neoplasm is malignant, in situ, benign, or of uncertain or
unspecified behavior and then identify any secondary (metastatic)
sites.
Neoplasms are staged, which means that they are evaluated for
placement on a common grading scale based on the level of invasion.
Staging
Example
Staging for endometrial, cervical, and ovarian malignancies is
staged based on if the malignancy is:
• 
Stage I, Confined to corpus
• 
Stage II, Involves corpus and cervix
• 
Stage III, Extends outside uterus but not outside true pelvis
• 
Stage IV, Extends outside true pelvis or involves rectum or bladder
Staging
Example
Staging for renal cancer
• 
Stage I, tumor of kidney capsule only
• 
Stage II, tumor invading renal capsule/vein but within fascia
• 
Stage III, tumor extending to regional lymph node/vena cava
• 
Stage IV, other organ metastasis
The pathology report and staging information will be documented
in the medical record.
To assign a diagnosis code to a neoplasm:
1. 
Identify the morphology or histologic type of the neoplasm
documented. Examples of histology types are carcinoma,
adenocarcinoma, sarcoma, melanoma, lymphoma, lipoma, and
adenoma.
2. 
If the histologic type is known, reference the type in the Neoplasm
Table.
3. 
Determine the appropriate column in the Neoplasm Table, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 5-3
.
4. 
Reference the code in the Tabular List.
 
FIGURE 5–3
I-10 Neoplasm Table.
Sequencing and complications. 
When treatment is directed at the primary site of the neoplasm,
designate the 
primary
 site as the first-listed diagnosis. If the treatment
is directed at the secondary site of the neoplasm, designate the
secondary
 site as the first-listed diagnosis. When the encounter is only
for chemotherapy (Z51.11), immunotherapy (Z51.12), or radiation
therapy (Z51.0), assign the category Z51 code as the first-listed
diagnosis and a code for the malignancy as the secondary diagnosis.
Sequencing
Example
Patient presents for immunotherapy for a malignant, primary
neoplasm of the trigone of the bladder. Report:
• 
Z51.12 (Immunotherapy)
• 
C67.0 (Malignant neoplasm of trigone of bladder)
If the encounter is for the management and treatment of a
complication associated with a neoplasm, the first-listed diagnosis is
the complication with additional code(s) to report the neoplasm.
Sequencing
Example
A patient with a malignant, primary neoplasm of the pylorus has
been receiving chemotherapy and develops dehydration as a side
effect of the chemotherapy. The encounter is only for treatment of the
dehydration. Report:
• 
Complication:
E86.0 (Dehydration)
• 
Adverse effect:
T45.1X5A (Adverse effect of antineoplastic)
• 
Neoplasm:
C16.4 (Malignant neoplasm of pylorus)
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C. 2.c.
Coding and sequencing of complications
1)
 
Anemia associated with malignancy
 
When admission/encounter is
for management of an anemia associated with the malignancy, and
the treatment is only for anemia, the appropriate code for the
malignancy is sequenced as the principal or first-listed diagnosis
followed by the appropriate code for the anemia (such as code
D63.0, Anemia in neoplastic disease).
2) 
Anemia associated with chemotherapy, immunotherapy and
radiation therapy
 
When the admission/encounter is for
management of an anemia associated with an adverse effect of the
administration of chemotherapy or immunotherapy and the only
treatment is for the anemia, the anemia code is sequenced first
followed by the appropriate codes for the neoplasm and the adverse
effect (T45.1X5, Adverse effect of antineoplastic and
immunosuppressive drugs).
 When the admission/encounter is for
management of an anemia associated with an adverse effect of
radiotherapy, the anemia code should be sequenced first, followed
by the appropriate neoplasm code and code Y84.2, Radiological
procedure and radiotherapy as the cause of abnormal reaction of
the patient, or of later complication, without mention of
misadventure at the time of the procedure.
According to the Guidelines, when an encounter is for anemia
associated with a malignant neoplasm, and the treatment is only for
the anemia, report “anemia in neoplastic disease” with D63.0
secondary to the neoplasm code. This supports the note that follows
D63.0, which states to “Code first neoplasm (C00-D49).”
Tabular:
D63 Anemia in chronic diseases classified elsewhere
D63.0 Anemia in neoplastic disease
Code first neoplasm (C00-D49)
Anemia
Example
A patient with a malignant, primary neoplasm of the pylorus has
been receiving chemotherapy and develops aplastic anemia from the
chemotherapy. The encounter is only for treatment of the anemia.
Report:
• 
Complication:
D61.1 Drug-induced aplastic anemia
• 
Adverse effect:
T45.1X5A (Adverse effect of antineoplastic)
• 
Neoplasm:
C16.4 (Malignant neoplasm of pylorus)
If, however, the encounter is only for the management of the
neoplasm, report the malignancy first.
If, during the encounter for the chemotherapy, the patient develops
a side effect, such as nausea, report a code from category Z51 as the
first-listed followed by a code(s) for the malignancy and a code for
the adverse effect of antineoplastic drug, and a code for the nausea.
History of Z codes. 
A code from category Z85 reports a personal history of malignant
neoplasm. These history codes report a malignant neoplasm that has
been excised or eradicated and is no longer present. Be careful in
determining whether the physician is indicating a personal past and
current history of the malignancy or a true personal past history.
As long as the neoplasm is being treated with adjunctive therapy
(another treatment used in conjunction with the primary treatment,
for example, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, medication) following
surgical removal of the cancer (primary treatment), report the
neoplasm as if it still exists. You would not assign a “history of” Z
code because the neoplasm is the reason for the treatment. Instead, the
neoplasm is reported as a current or active disease.
EXERCISE 5-3
Neoplasm Codes
Assign diagnosis codes to the following:
1 
A patient is admitted for chemotherapy for primary ovarian cancer.
Two codes are needed for this case: one for the encounter for
chemotherapy and the other for the malignant, primary, ovarian
neoplasm.
Codes: ________________, ____________________
2 
A patient is admitted for radiation therapy for metastatic bone
cancer. The patient had a mastectomy for breast cancer 3 years
earlier. There is a code for the admission for management of the
radiation therapy, a code to report the secondary neoplasm, and a
code for the personal history of a malignant neoplasm of the breast.
Codes: ________________, _______________,
____________________
3 
A patient is admitted with chest pain, shortness of breath, and a
history of bloody sputum. Diagnostic x-ray film shows a mass in the
bronchial tube. A diagnostic bronchoscopy is performed and is
positive for cancer. The pathology report states “metastatic
carcinoma of bronchus, primary unknown.” The patient chooses to
undergo chemotherapy.
a 
What is the description of the first-listed
diagnosis?
_________________________________________
b 
What is the subsequent diagnosis description?
______________________________________________
c 
Is the metastatic carcinoma of the bronchus a
primary or secondary malignant neoplasm?
________________
d 
What are the diagnosis codes for this case?
Codes: _______________, ________________
4 
A patient is admitted with uncontrolled nausea and vomiting after
chemotherapy treatment for lung cancer.
a 
How many codes would be needed to
accurately report this case? ________________
b 
What is the first-listed diagnosis?
______________________________________
Code for first-listed DX: ____________
c 
What is the adverse effect?
___________________________________________
Code for adverse effect: ____________
d 
What is the secondary diagnosis?
______________________________________
Code for secondary DX: ____________
5 
Anemia due to gastric cancer
Codes: ________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Unknown or unspecified site. 
If there is a 
known
 secondary site, a code must be assigned to the
primary site or the history of a primary site. It is possible for the
primary site to be unknown and the secondary site to be known.
Example
Diagnosis:
Metastatic bone cancer
This statement indicates that the bone cancer is a secondary
neoplasm, but there is no indication of the location of the primary
site.
Neoplasm
Table:
bone C79.51 (Secondary)
unknown primary site or unspecified C80
Tabular:
C79.5
Secondary malignant neoplasm of bone and bone marrow
C79.51 Secondary malignant neoplasm of bone
Tabular:
C80
Malignant neoplasm without specification of site
C80.1 Malignant neoplasm, unspecified
Codes:
C79.51, C80.1 Metastatic bone cancer (if the treatment is for the secondary site)
C80.1, C79.51 Metastatic bone cancer (if the treatment or diagnostic workup is for the primary site)
The sequencing of the primary and secondary neoplasms is
dependent on the treatment circumstances documented in the health
record. If treatment was directed toward the secondary malignancy,
the code for the secondary malignancy would be sequenced first. If
treatment was focused on determining the site of the unknown
primary malignancy, the code for the unknown primary site would be
sequenced first.
EXERCISE 5-4
More Neoplasms
Assign I-10 codes for the following neoplasms:
1 
Multiple myeloma
Code: ________________
2 
Carcinoma in situ, cervix
Code: ________________
3 
Cancer of the sigmoid colon with spread to the peritoneum
Codes: ________________, ________________
4 
Adenocarcinoma of the prostate with metastasis to the bone
Codes: ________________, ________________
5 
Metastatic cancer to the brain; primary unknown (treatment directed
to metastatic site)
Codes: ________________, ________________
6 
Metastatic carcinoma of the breast to the lungs; the breast carcinoma
has been removed by mastectomy
Codes: ________________, ________________
7 
Mr. Jensen is status post colon resection 3 months ago for sigmoid
colon cancer and is now admitted for adjunct chemotherapy.
Codes: ________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the blood and blood-
forming organs and certain disorders
involving the immune mechanism
Chapter 3
, Diseases of the Blood and Blood-Forming Organs and
Certain Disorders Involving the Immune Mechanism, in the I-10
contains codes in the range of D50-D89, as illustrated in 
Fig. 5-4
.
 
FIGURE 5–4
Blocks in I-10, Chapter 3, Diseases of the Blood and
Blood Forming Organs and Certain Disorders Involving the Immune
Mechanism (D50-D89).
Anemia
The 
anemia
 codes (D50-D64) are often reported diagnosis codes
because anemia is a common blood disease. Anemia is the main term
under which you will find the many subterms that relate to anemia. In
addition to there being numerous subterms for anemia, many of those
subterms have lengthy additional subterms listed, as illustrated in 
Fig.
5-5
.
 
FIGURE 5–5
Anemia subterms in I-10 Index.
There are two anemias that are easy to confuse—anemia of chronic
disease and chronic simple anemia. These two diagnostic statements
do not have the same meaning. In anemia of chronic disease, the word
“chronic” describes the nature of the disease that is the cause of the
anemia—for example, anemia due to neoplastic disease. The
neoplasm is the chronic disease causing the anemia. According to the
Guidelines, if anemia is the reason for the encounter, report the code
for the malignancy first, followed by the code for anemia in neoplastic
disease (D63.0). In the diagnostic statement chronic, simple anemia,
the word “chronic” describes simple anemia. Let’s see what difference
these diagnostic statements make in code assignment.
Anemia
Example 1
Diagnosis:
Anemia of chronic disease
In this diagnosis statement, you do not know what the chronic
disease is.
Index:
Anemia
due to (in) (with)
chronic disease classified elsewhere NEC D63.8
Tabular:
D63 Anemia in chronic diseases classified elsewhere
D63.8 Anemia in other chronic diseases classified elsewhere
Code:
D63.8 Anemia of chronic disease
If there is any question about the classification of the anemia, check
with the physician.
Anemia
Example 2
Diagnosis:
Chronic simple anemia
Index:
Anemia D64.9
, chronic simple D53.9
In this example, the Index does indicate a subterm that further
directs you to chronic simple D53.9.
Tabular:
D53.9 Nutritional anemia, unspecified
Simple chronic anemia
Code:
D53.9 Chronic simple anemia
Coagulation defects, purpura, and other
hemorrhagic conditions
Codes in the range D65-D69 report coagulation defects (such as
defibrination syndrome and hemophilia). Many of these coagulation
defects are congenital conditions, such as Von Willebrand’s disease,
but there are also acquired coagulation defects, such as those caused
by anticoagulant therapies (warfarin, heparin). Some conditions can
be either congenital or acquired, such as primary thrombophilia, also
known as primary hypercoagulable state. Extensive terms that are
included in the code description are common in these code blocks, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 5-6
.
 
FIGURE 5–6
Terms following code description in I-10.
Other disorders of blood and blood-forming
organs (D70-D77)
The conditions in the D70-D77 blocks report blood disorders, such as
neutropenia, eosinophilia, elevated white blood count, and diseases of
the spleen. Category D72 reports disorders of the white blood cells,
such as lymphocytopenia, basophilia, and other abnormal leukocytes.
Category D78 reports intraoperative and postprocedural
complications of the spleen, such as hemorrhage, hematoma,
puncture, laceration, and other complications. Codes in the D80-D89
range reports immune disorders, such as hereditary antibody defects
and deficiencies that are associated with other major defects (Wiskott-
Aldrich syndrome, Di George’s syndrome, etc.).
EXERCISE 5-5
Diseases of the Blood and Blood-Forming
Organs
Assign codes for the following:
1 
Pernicious, congenital, anemia
Code: ________________
2 
Acquired afibrinogenemia
Code: ________________
3 
Hemophilia A
Code: ________________
4 
Acute blood-loss anemia
Code: ________________
5 
Benign familial polycythemia
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic
diseases
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.4.
Chapter 4
: endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases
(e00-e89)
a. 
Diabetes mellitus
The diabetes mellitus codes are combination
codes that include the type of diabetes mellitus,
the body system affected, and the complications
affecting that body system. As many codes
within a particular category as are necessary to
describe all of the complications of the disease
may be used. They should be sequenced based
on the reason for a particular encounter. Assign
as many codes from categories E08 – E13 as
needed to identify all of the associated
conditions that the patient has.
1) 
Type of diabetes
The age of a patient is not the sole determining
factor, though most type 1 diabetics develop the
condition before reaching puberty. For this
reason type 1 diabetes mellitus is also referred
to as juvenile diabetes.
2) 
Type of diabetes mellitus not documented
If the type of diabetes mellitus is not documented
in the medical record the default is E11.-, Type
2 diabetes mellitus.
3) 
Diabetes mellitus and the use of insulin
If the documentation in a medical record does not
indicate the type of diabetes but does indicate
that the patient uses insulin, code E11, Type 2
diabetes mellitus, should be assigned. Code
Z79.4, Long-term (current) use of insulin,
should also be assigned to indicate that the
patient uses insulin. Code Z79.4 should not be
assigned if insulin is given temporarily to bring
a type 2 patient’s blood sugar under control
during an encounter.
4) 
Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy and
gestational diabetes
See Section I.C.15. Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy.
See Section I.C.15. Gestational (pregnancy induced)
diabetes
5) 
Complications due to insulin pump
malfunction
(a) 
Underdose of insulin due to insulin pump
failure
An underdose of insulin due to an insulin pump
failure should be assigned to a code from
subcategory T85.6, Mechanical complication of
other specified internal and external prosthetic
devices, implants and grafts, that specifies the
type of pump malfunction, as the principal or
first-listed code, followed by code T38.3X6-,
Underdosing of insulin and oral hypoglycemic
[antidiabetic] drugs. Additional codes for the
type of diabetes mellitus and any associated
complications due to the underdosing should
also be assigned.
(b) 
Overdose of insulin due to insulin pump
failure
The principal or first-listed code for an encounter
due to an insulin pump malfunction resulting
in an overdose of insulin, should also be T85.6-,
Mechanical complication of other specified
internal and external prosthetic devices,
implants and grafts, followed by code T38.3X1-,
Poisoning by insulin and oral hypoglycemic
[antidiabetic] drugs, accidental (unintentional).
Chapter 4
 in the Tabular of the I-10 describes diseases or conditions
affecting the endocrine system. The blocks in 
Chapter 4
 are displayed
in 
Fig. 5-7
. The endocrine system involves glands that are located
throughout the body and are responsible for secreting hormones into
the bloodstream.
 
FIGURE 5–7
Blocks in the I-10, Chapter 4, Endocrine, Nutritional, and
Metabolic Diseases (E00-E89).
Frequently used codes in 
Chapter 4
 are E08-E13, Diabetes mellitus.
The diabetes mellitus codes are combination codes that include the
type of diabetes mellitus as well as any complications due to diabetes.
When you locate “Diabetes” in the Index, you will note that 
there are
many subterms that must be carefully reviewed before referencing the
code in the Tabular.
Example
Diagnosis:
Type 1 diabetes mellitus with retinopathy with macular edema
Index:
Diabetes,
 type 1, with, retinopathy, with macular edema E10.311
Tabular:
E10 Type 1 diabetes mellitus
E10.3 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic complications
E10.31 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy
E10.311 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with unspecified diabetic retinopathy with macular edema
The health care providers usually document the type of diabetes
mellitus. You should not assume that because a patient is receiving
insulin that he or she is a type 1 diabetic because a type 2 diabetic may
also receive insulin. Type 1 diabetes usually develops before the
patient reaches puberty and for that reason, type 1 is also referred to
as juvenile diabetes as indicated in 
Fig. 5-8
.
 
FIGURE 5–8
Type 1 diabetes mellitus is reported with E10 codes.
If the type of diabetes is not stated in the documentation, query the
physician or assign a default code for type 2 diabetes mellitus (E11.-).
Note in 
Fig. 5-9
 that the Includes note following E11 indicates that the
code includes “diabetes NOS.” If the medical documentation does not
indicate the type of diabetes but does indicate that the patient is
currently using insulin, you also report E11.-. If the documentation
indicates that the patient has been routinely using insulin, assign
Z79.4 to report the current long-term use of insulin. You would not
report Z79.4 if the patient was given insulin on a temporary basis,
such as to bring the blood sugar under control during an encounter.
 
FIGURE 5–9
Default code for diabetes not otherwise specified—E11,
Type 2 diabetes mellitus.
An insulin pump is used to administer insulin to a diabetic, as
shown in 
Fig. 5-10
. It may malfunction and provide an underdose or
overdose of insulin. The malfunction is a complication and is reported
with three codes—one to report the mechanical complication, one to
report an underdose or overdose, and one to report the patient’s type
of diabetes mellitus.
Example
Underdose
T85.6-
Mechanical complication of the pump (first-listed diagnosis)
T38.3X6-
Underdosing of insulin
E11.- -
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Example
Overdose
T85.6-
Mechanical complication of the pump (first-listed diagnosis)
T38.3X1-
Unintentional poisoning by insulin
E11.- -
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
 
FIGURE 5–10
Insulin pump used to administer insulin.
If the underdosing or overdosing created additional complications,
these complications are also reported.
EXERCISE 5-6
Endocrine, Nutritional, and Metabolic
Diseases
Fill in the codes for the following:
1 
Addison’s disease
Code: ________________
2 
Dehydration
Code: ________________
3 
Diabetes mellitus with hypoglycemic coma
Code: ________________
4 
Graves’ disease with thyrotoxic crisis
Code: ________________
5 
Chronic Diabetic foot ulcer (diabetic peripheral angiopathy, no
gangrene), in patient with diabetes mellitus, type 1, out of control
Codes: ________________, ________________,
___________________
6 
Malnutrition
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Mental, behavioral and
neurodevelopmental disorders
Chapter 5 in the Tabular of the I-10 is Mental, Behavioral and
Neurodevelopmental Disorders. The blocks in this chapter are
displayed in 
Fig. 5-11
.
 
FIGURE 5–11
Blocks in I-10, 
Chapter 5
, Mental, Behavioral and
Neurodevelopmental Disorders (F01-F99).
Your understanding of the definitions of these mental disorders is
necessary to code accurately. When assigning codes from Chapter 5,
you need to take extra care to select the appropriate code(s) and report
only those diagnoses that are documented in the medical record.
Mental disorders can be difficult to code because physicians are not
always as specific in the diagnostic statements as might be required by
the codes in the I-10 chapter. When in 
doubt, always check with the
physician. Just one term in the medical record can make a big
difference in the code(s) you assign.
Mental disorders in the I-10 are grouped based on the etiology in
cerebral disease, brain injury, or other injury leading to the cerebral
dysfunction. These dysfunctions may be a result of disease, injury, or
secondary, such as in a systemic disease or disorder that affects the
brain as one of multiple organs.
Dementia
Dementias are reported based on whether the dementia is
documented to be vascular (F01), classified elsewhere (F02), or
unspecified type (F03). There is a “Code first the underlying
physiological condition
 
.
 
.
 
.” at both F01 and F02, directing the coder to
report the condition or sequela that resulted in the dementia first. The
underlying condition (etiology) is listed first, followed by the
dementia code.
Dementia
Example
The medical record indicates that the patient has Alzheimer’s
disease with early onset (G30.0) that resulted in dementia without
behavioral disturbances (F02.80)—report G30.0, F02.80.
The Excludes1 note following F02, Dementia in other diseases
classified elsewhere, gives direction to the coder to NEVER report
G31.83, Dementia with Parkinsonism, with F02. This Excludes1 note is
used when two conditions cannot occur together, such as a congenital
or acquired condition—it can only be one or the other, not both. The
same is true for G31.83, which reports dementia 
with
 Parkinsonism—
you cannot report dementia twice. The combination code G31.83
reports the dementia and the Parkinsonism in one code. The
Excludes2 note indicates what is not included in the code. The
Excludes2 at F02 states that vascular dementia (F01.5) is not a part of
the condition and that it is possible for the patient to have both
dementia (F02.8-) and vascular dementia (F01.5-), and it is acceptable
to assign both codes. There are many Excludes1 and Excludes2 notes
throughout Chapter 5 of the I-10.
Substance use
The category to report alcohol-related disorders or dependence is F10,
and the codes are selected based on if the condition is documented to
be alcohol abuse, dependence, dependence with withdrawal, or
unspecified use. F10 may be assigned with Y90.-, Evidence of alcohol
involvement determined by blood alcohol level, based on the
documentation level in the medical record. The levels are displayed in
Fig. 5-12
. Take a moment now to review the codes in the F11-F19
range used to report opioids, cannabis, sedatives, cocaine, stimulants,
hallucinogens, nicotine, and others.
 
FIGURE 5–12
Supplementary codes to report blood alcohol level.
Psychological disorders
Codes F20-F29 report schizophrenia, schizotypal (social isolation and
odd behaviors), delusional, and other non-mood psychotic disorders.
Codes F30-F39 report mood and 
non-mood disorders. Mood disorders
are also known as affective disorders with the main characteristic of
disturbance in mood, most commonly anxiety, depression, and
bipolar disorders. Codes F40-F99 report phobias, obsessive-
compulsive disorders, adjustment disorders, amnesias, hypochondrias
(health anxiety), mental retardation, etc. There are many Excludes
notes throughout these codes and conditions that are or are not
included when reporting the codes.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.5.
Chapter 5: Mental, behavioral and neurodevelopmental
disorders (f01 – f99)
a. 
Pain disorders related to psychological factors
Assign code F45.41, for pain that is exclusively related to
psychological disorders. As indicated by the Excludes 1 note under
category G89, a code from category G89 should not be assigned with
code F45.41
Code F45.42, Pain disorders with related psychological factors,
should be used with a code from category G89, Pain, not elsewhere
classified, if there is documentation of a psychological component for
a patient with acute or chronic pain.
See Section I.C.6. Pain
Psychological pain
Pain that is exclusively psychological is reported with F45.41. This
code may not be assigned in conjunction with a code from the
category G89, Pain, NEC, as noted in the Excludes 1 note under
category G89. Code F45.42, Pain disorders with related psychological
factors, is reported with a code from category G89, Pain, not
elsewhere classified, if there is documentation of a psychological
component to the pain.
EXERCISE 5-7
Mental, Behavioral and
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Now you have a chance to show your skill by coding the following:
1 
Alzheimer’s dementia with aggressive behavior
Codes: _______________, ________________
2 
Depression with anxiety
Code: ________________
3 
Profound mental retardation
Code: ________________
4 
Anorexia nervosa
Code: ________________
5 
Delirium tremens due to withdrawal in alcohol-dependent patient
Code: ________________
6 
Withdrawal from heroin dependence, daily use
Code: __________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the nervous system
Chapter 6
 of the Tabular I-10 is Diseases of the Nervous System and
describes diseases or conditions affecting the central nervous system
and the peripheral nervous system. 
Fig. 5-13
 displays 
Chapter 6
blocks.
 
FIGURE 5–13
Blocks in I-10, Chapter 6, Diseases of the Nervous
System (G00-G99).
The chapter contains some combination codes in which one code
identifies both the manifestation and the etiology.
Combination Codes
Example
Diagnosis:
Pneumococcal meningitis
This diagnostic statement means the meningitis is due to
pneumococcal bacteria.
Index:
Meningitis,
 pneumococcal G00.1
Tabular:
G00 Bacterial meningitis, not elsewhere classified
G00.1 Pneumococcal meningitis
Code:
G00.1 Pneumococcal meningitis
Code G00.1 includes the manifestation of meningitis and also the
etiology of pneumococcal organism. No separate code is required to
report the organism in this diagnostic statement.
In 
Chapter 6
 of the I-10, you will also locate conditions that are
manifestations of other diseases.
Manifestations
Example
Diagnosis:
Rheumatoid neuritis with localized amyloidosis
Index:
Neuritis (rheumatoid)
 M79.2; amyloid, any site E85.4 [G63]
Entries such as E85.4 [G63] instruct you to report the neuritis
[E85.4] first, followed by the polyneuropathy in disease classified
elsewhere [G63]. Both codes need to be verified in the Tabular.
Tabular:
G63
Polyneuropathy in diseases classified elsewhere
Tabular:
E85 Amyloidosis
E85.4 Organ-limited amyloidosis
Localized amyloidosis
Codes:
E85.4, G63 Rheumatoid neuritis with localized amyloidosis
Pain (non-psychological)
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.6.
Chapter 6
: diseases of nervous system (G00-G99)
b. 
Pain - Category G89
1) 
General coding information
Codes in category G89, Pain, not elsewhere
classified, may be used in conjunction with
codes from other categories and chapters to
provide more detail about acute or chronic pain
and neoplasm-related pain, unless otherwise
indicated below.
If the pain is not specified as acute or chronic,
post-thoracotomy, postprocedural, or
neoplasm-related, do not assign codes from
category G89.
A code from category G89 should not be assigned
if the underlying (definitive) diagnosis is
known, unless the reason for the encounter is
pain control/management and not management
of the underlying condition.
When an admission or encounter is for a
procedure aimed at treating the underlying
condition (e.g., spinal fusion, kyphoplasty), a
code for the underlying condition (e.g.,
vertebral fracture, spinal stenosis) should be
assigned as the principal diagnosis. No code
from category G89 should be assigned.
(a) 
Category G89 Codes as Principal or First-
Listed Diagnosis
Category G89 codes are acceptable as principal
diagnosis or the first-listed code:
• 
When pain control or pain management is the
reason for the admission/encounter (e.g., a
patient with displaced intervertebral disc, nerve
impingement and severe back pain presents for
injection of steroid into the spinal canal). The
underlying cause of the pain should be
reported as an additional diagnosis, if known.
• 
When a patient is admitted for the insertion of a
neurostimulator for pain control, assign the
appropriate pain code as the principal or first-
listed diagnosis. When an admission or
encounter is for a procedure aimed at treating
the underlying condition and a neurostimulator
is inserted for pain control during the same
admission/encounter, a code for the underlying
condition should be assigned as the principal
diagnosis and the appropriate pain code should
be assigned as a secondary diagnosis.
(b) 
Use of Category G89 Codes in Conjunction
with Site Specific Pain Codes
(i) 
Assigning Category G89 and Site-Specific
Pain Codes
Codes from category G89 may be used in
conjunction with codes that identify the site of
pain (including codes from 
chapter 18
) if the
category G89 code provides additional
information. For example, if the code describes
the site of the pain, but does not fully describe
whether the pain is acute or chronic, then both
codes should be assigned.
(ii) 
Sequencing of Category G89 Codes with
Site-Specific Pain Codes
The sequencing of category G89 codes with site-
specific pain codes (including 
chapter 18
 codes), is
dependent on the circumstances of the
encounter/admission as follows:
• 
If the encounter is for pain control or pain
management, assign the code from category G89
followed by the code identifying the specific site
of pain (e.g., encounter for pain management for
acute neck pain from trauma is assigned code
G89.11, Acute pain due to trauma, followed by
code M54.2, Cervicalgia, to identify the site of
pain).• 
If the encounter is for any other reason
except pain control or pain management, and a
related definitive diagnosis has not been
established (confirmed) by the provider, assign
the code for the specific site of pain first, followed
by the appropriate code from category G89.
2) 
Pain due to devices, implants and grafts
See Section I.C.19. Pain due to medical devices
3) 
Postoperative Pain
The provider’s documentation should be used to
guide the coding of postoperative pain, as well
as 
Section III. Reporting Additional Diagnoses
 and
Section IV. Diagnostic Coding and Reporting in the
Outpatient Setting.
The default for post-thoracotomy and other
postoperative pain not specified as acute or
chronic is the code for the acute form.
Routine or expected postoperative pain
immediately after surgery should not be coded.
(a) 
Postoperative pain not associated with
specific postoperative complication
Postoperative pain not associated with a specific
postoperative complication is assigned to the
appropriate postoperative pain code in
category G89.
(b) 
Postoperative pain associated with specific
postoperative complication
Postoperative pain associated with a specific
postoperative complication (such as painful
wire sutures) is assigned to the appropriate
code(s) found in 
Chapter 19
, Injury, poisoning,
and certain other consequences of external
causes. If appropriate, use additional code(s)
from category G89 to identify acute or chronic
pain (G89.18 or G89.28).
4) 
Chronic pain
Chronic pain is classified to subcategory G89.2.
There is no time frame defining when pain
becomes chronic pain. The provider’s
documentation should be used to guide use of
these codes.
5) 
Neoplasm Related Pain
Code G89.3 is assigned to pain documented as
being related, associated or due to cancer,
primary or secondary malignancy, or tumor.
This code is assigned regardless of whether the
pain is acute or chronic.
This code may be assigned as the principal or
first-listed code when the stated reason for the
admission/encounter is documented as pain
control/pain management. The underlying
neoplasm should be reported as an additional
diagnosis.
When the reason for the admission/encounter is
management of the neoplasm and the pain
associated with the neoplasm is also
documented, code G89.3 may be assigned as an
additional diagnosis. It is not necessary to
assign an additional code for the site of the
pain.
See Section I.C.2 for instructions on the sequencing of
neoplasms for all other stated reasons for the
admission/encounter (except for pain control/pain
management).
6) 
Chronic pain syndrome
Central pain syndrome (G89.0) and chronic pain
syndrome (G89.4) are different than the term
“chronic pain,” and therefore codes should only
be used when the provider has specifically
documented this condition.
See
 
Section I.C.5. Pain disorders related to
psychological factors
There are many codes to report localized pain throughout the I-10
by coding the pain to the specific site of the pain.
Example site-specific pain codes
■
 
chest pain (R07.1-R07.9)
■
 
ear pain (H92.0-)
■
 
eye pain (H57.1-)
■
 
headache (R51)
■
 
joint pain (M25.5-)
■
 
limb pain (M79.6-)
■
 
lumbar region pain (M54.5)
■
 
pelvic and perineal pain (R10.2)
■
 
shoulder pain (M25.51-)
■
 
spine pain (M54.-)
■
 
throat pain (R07.0)
■
 
tongue pain (K14.6)
Category R52 reports unspecified pain that is acute, chronic,
generalized, or not otherwise specified. Acute (G89.0/G89.1) or
chronic (G89.2), post-thoracotomy, post-procedural, or neoplasm-
related (G89.3) pain that does not have a more specific code is
reported with a code from category G89. The default for post-
thoracotomy and other post-procedural pain is “acute pain.” You do
not report routine post-procedural pain because that pain is a usual
and expected condition. The G89 category code can be reported with
the site-specific pain codes, if the assignment of G89 adds additional
information. For example, if a site-specific code was 
reported but that
code did not indicate if the pain was acute or chronic, both the site-
specific code and a code from category G89 are reported.
If the underlying reason for the pain is known, the more specific
pain code should be assigned, such as tongue pain, K14.6, or spine
pain, M54.0-, rather than a general pain code.
If the reason for the encounter is solely for management of 
pain
with no treatment or management of the underlying condition, the
G89 code is the first-listed. If known, additional codes are assigned for
the underlying cause of the pain. If the patient presents only for
treatment of the 
underlying
 condition and no treatment or
management was provided for pain, the underlying condition is the
first-listed diagnosis and no pain code is assigned.
Some patients have chronic pain, such as chronic back, leg, or arm
pain. One treatment option for conditions that result in chronic pain is
a neurostimulator, which is an implantable device that delivers
electrical energy directly to the nerve fibers and blocks the pain
sensation from reaching the brain. When an encounter is for the
insertion of a neurostimulator, report the pain as the first-listed
diagnosis. When the insertion is for the treatment of the underlying
condition, report the underlying condition as the first-listed diagnosis.
Dominant and nondominant sides
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.6.
Chapter 6
: diseases of nervous system (G00-G99)
a. 
Dominant/nondominant side
Codes from category G81, Hemiplegia and
hemiparesis, and subcategories, G83.1,
Monoplegia of lower limb, G83.2, Monoplegia
of upper limb, and G83.3, Monoplegia,
unspecified, identify whether the dominant or
nondominant side is affected. Should the
affected side be documented, but not specified
as dominant or nondominant, and the
classification system does not indicate a default,
code selection is as follows:
• 
For ambidextrous patients, the default should
be dominant.
• 
If the left side is affected, the default is non-
dominant.
• 
If the right side is affected, the default is
dominant.
Codes in categories G81, Hemiplegia and hemiparesis, and G83,
Other paralytic syndromes, are reported based on if the plegia
(paralysis) is of the patient’s dominant side. If the medical record does
not indicate if the patient is left-hand or right-hand dominant, report
the condition as occurring on the dominant side if the paralysis is on
the right side. If the patient is ambidextrous (both left- and right-
handed), report the default of dominant. These categories of codes are
assigned when the paralysis is from an unspecified cause. The codes
are also assigned in multiple coding to report paralysis from any
cause. These codes are not assigned to report congenital cerebral palsy
or hemiplegia/hemiparesis that is due to a sequela of cerebrovascular
disease.
EXERCISE 5-8
Diseases of the Nervous System and
Sense Organs
Assign codes for the following:
1 
Meningitis due to 
Proteus morganii
Codes: _______________, ________________
2 
Multiple sclerosis
Code: ________________
3 
Bell’s palsy
Code: ________________
4 
Seizure complex, febrile with status epilepticus
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the eye and adnexa
Chapter 7
 of the I-10 is Diseases of the Eye and Adnexa (H00-H59).
The chapter contains the blocks shown in 
Fig. 5-14
.
 
FIGURE 5–14
Chapter 7, H codes from the I-10.
Note that at the beginning of 
Chapter 7
 of the I-10, there are
significant Excludes2 notes indicating all the conditions that are not
included in the H00-H59 codes. For example, diabetes mellitus-related
eye conditions are reported with E09.3-, E10.3-, E11.3-, and E13.3-. The
terminology within 
Chapter 7
 is complex, so a good medical
dictionary is a must when reporting services with these H codes.
Figs. 5-15
, 
5-16
, and 
5-17
 illustrate the structure of the eye, ocular
adnexa, eyelid, and lacrimal apparatus.
 
FIGURE 5–15
Eye and ocular adnexa
 
FIGURE 5–16
Eyelid
 
FIGURE 5–17
Lacrimal apparatus
Hordeolum and chalazion
Hordeolum is an inflammatory infection of the sebaceous glands at
the base of the eyelashes (stye) and if external (externum) is reported
with H00.01-, and if internal (internum) is reported with H00.02-.
Chalazion is also an infection of the eyelid that forms a mass on the
eyelid. These codes (H00.1) are based on location of right or left eye
and upper, lower, or unspecified eyelid.
Entropion and ectropion
Entropion
 is an inward turning (inversion) of the margin of the eyelid
as shown in 
Fig. 5-18
. Entropion can be unspecified (H02.00-), a result
of a scar or tightening (cicatricial, H02.01-), mechanical (lack of muscle
support, H02.02-), senile (due to aging, H02.03-), or spastic (spasm of
muscle, H02.04-). Trichiasis is the ingrowing of hairs of the eyelashes
and when present without entropion is reported with H02.05-.
Ectropion
 is the pulling away (eversion) of the eyelid as shown in 
Fig.
5-19
, and the codes are divided as the entropion codes are: unspecified
(H02.10-), cicatricial (H02.11-), mechanical (H02.12-), senile (H02.13-),
or spastic (H02.14-).
 
 
FIGURE 5–18
Entropion is an inward turning of the eyelid. (Note that
the patient in B has undergone corneal transplantation.)
 
 
FIGURE 5–19
Ectropion is an outward sagging of the eyelid.
Lacrimal system
Codes to report disorders of the lacrimal system, such as
dacryoadenitis (inflammation of the lacrimal gland), dacryops (watery
eye), epiphora (overflow of tears due to stricture of the lacrimal
passage), dacryolith (lacrimal calculus), are reported with codes from
category H04.
The remainder of the codes to report conditions of the eye are
divided based on the location, such as orbit, conjunctiva, sclera,
cornea, etc.
EXERCISE 5-9
Eye and Adnexa
Assign codes for the following:
1 
Primary right open-angle glaucoma, mid stage
Code: ________________
2 
Stenosis of the right lacrimal sac
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the ear and mastoid
process
The blocks in 
Chapter 8
 of the I-10 are displayed in 
Fig. 5-20
.
 
FIGURE 5–20
Chapter 8, Ear and Mastoid Process codes from the I-
10.
The codes in the Diseases of the Ear and Mastoid Process are H60-
H95 and are divided based on the structure of the ear (external,
middle and mastoid, and inner, see 
Fig. 5-21
) and
intraoperative/postprocedural complications (H95).
 
FIGURE 5–21
Auditory System
Ear
External ear. 
Conditions of the external ear such as abscess, cellulitis, infection,
hematoma, and cholesteatoma (peeling layers of horny epithelium)
are reported with categories H60-H62. These codes are based on
laterality (right, left, bilateral, unspecified). A common condition
reported with these codes is impacted cerumen (ear wax) based on the
right, left, bilateral, or unspecified ear (H61.2-).
Middle ear and mastoid. 
Conditions of the middle ear are those such as nonsuppurative otitis
media (infection in which clear pale fluid may accumulate),
suppurative otitis media (infection with purulent [pus] discharge). If
the otitis media is a result of an underlying disease, such as a viral
disease, you report the underlying disease first, followed by a code
from category H67, Otitis media in diseases classified elsewhere. The
Eustachian tubes are part of the middle ear and may become
inflamed, infected, or obstructed, and these conditions are reported
with H68-H69.
Mastoiditis is an infection of a portion of the temporal bone that is
behind the ear (mastoid process) and is caused by an untreated otitis
media that results in an infection of the surrounding structures and
may even include the brain. Mastoiditis and related conditions are
reported with code H70.
Inner ear. 
Diseases of the inner ear are reported with codes H80-H83.
Otosclerosis is an inherited bone growth that causes hearing loss and
is reported with codes H80. Ménière’s (H81.-) disease is a vestibular
disorder that produces recurring symptoms that include severe and
intermittent hearing loss that may include the feeling of ear pressure
and pain. The codes are reported based on laterality.
Labyrinthitis is a balance disorder that follows an upper respiratory
infection or head injury. The inflammatory process affects the
labyrinth that houses the vestibular system of the inner ear. The
vestibular system senses changes in head positions.
Intraoperative and postprocedural complications of ear and
mastoid process NEC are reported with H95 codes.
EXERCISE 5-10
Ear and Mastoid Process
1 
Acute otitis media, right ear
Code: ________________
2 
Swimmer’s ear, left ear
Code: ________________
3 
Bilateral acute serous otitis media (nonsuppurative)
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the circulatory system
Chapter 9
 of the I-10 Tabular, Diseases of the Circulatory System (I00-
I99), contains diseases of the heart and blood vessels. The chapter
contains the blocks shown in 
Fig. 5-22
.
 
FIGURE 5–22
Blocks in I-10, Chapter 9, Diseases of the Circulatory
System I00-I99.
Hypertension
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.9.
Chapter 9
: diseases of the circulatory system (I00-I99)
a. 
Hypertension
1) 
Hypertension with Heart Disease
Heart conditions classified to I50.- or I51.4-I51.9,
are assigned to a code from category I11,
Hypertensive heart disease, when a causal
relationship is stated (due to hypertension) or
implied (hypertensive). Use an additional code
from category I50, Heart failure, to identify the
type of heart failure in those patients with heart
failure.
The same heart conditions (I50.-, I51.4-I51.9) with
hypertension, but without a stated causal
relationship, are coded separately. Sequence
according to the circumstances of the
admission/encounter.
2) 
Hypertensive Chronic Kidney Disease
Assign codes from category I12, Hypertensive
chronic kidney disease, when both
hypertension and a condition classifiable to
category N18, Chronic kidney disease (CKD),
are present. Unlike hypertension with heart
disease, ICD-10-CM presumes a cause-and-
effect relationship and classifies chronic kidney
disease with hypertension as hypertensive
chronic kidney disease.
The appropriate code from category N18 should
be used as a secondary code with a code from
category I12 to identify the stage of chronic
kidney disease.
See Section I.C.14. Chronic kidney disease.
If a patient has hypertensive chronic kidney
disease and acute renal failure, an additional
code for the acute renal failure is required.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.9.
Chapter 9
: diseases of the circulatory system (I00-I99)
a. 
Hypertension
4) 
Hypertensive Cerebrovascular Disease
For hypertensive cerebrovascular disease, first
assign the appropriate code from categories I60-
I69, followed by the appropriate hypertension
code.
5) 
Hypertensive Retinopathy
Subcategory H35.0, Background retinopathy and
retinal vascular changes, should be used with a
code from category I10-I15, Hypertensive
disease, to include the systemic hypertension.
The sequencing is based on the reason for the
encounter.
6) 
Hypertension, Secondary
Secondary hypertension is due to an underlying
condition. Two codes are required: one to
identify the underlying etiology and one from
category I15 to identify the hypertension.
Sequencing of codes is determined by the
reason for admission/encounter.
7) 
Hypertension, Transient
Assign code R03.0, Elevated blood pressure
reading without diagnosis of hypertension,
unless patient has an established diagnosis of
hypertension. Assign code O13.-, Gestational
[pregnancy-induced] hypertension without
significant proteinuria, or O14.-, Pre-eclampsia,
for transient hypertension of pregnancy.
8) 
Hypertension, Controlled
This diagnostic statement usually refers to an
existing state of hypertension under control by
therapy. Assign the appropriate code from
categories I10-I15, Hypertensive diseases.
9) 
Hypertension, Uncontrolled
Uncontrolled hypertension may refer to untreated
hypertension or hypertension not responding to
current therapeutic regimen. In either case,
assign the appropriate code from categories I10-
I15, Hypertensive diseases.
Hypertension
 is one of the most common conditions reported with
codes from this chapter. The Index contains the Hypertension entry
and many levels of subterms. 
Fig. 5-23
 illustrates a portion of the
Hypertension entry in the Index.
 
FIGURE 5–23
Hypertension entry in the I-10.
Hypertension refers to systemic arterial hypertension (high blood
pressure) and may be essential (primary) or secondary (due to an
underlying condition). 
Malignant hypertension
 is also known as
accelerated hypertension and is a severe form of hypertension,
manifested by headaches, blurred vision, dyspnea, and uremia. This
type of hypertension usually causes permanent organ damage and has
a poor prognosis. 
Benign hypertension
 is a continuous, mild blood
pressure elevation that can usually be controlled by medication.
Unspecified hypertension
 has not been specified in the medical
record as either benign or malignant.
There is no defined threshold of blood pressure above which an
individual is considered hypertensive. Commonly, a sustained
diastolic pressure of above 90 mm Hg and a sustained systolic
pressure of above 140 mm Hg constitutes hypertension. The physician
must document hypertension. A coder cannot report hypertension
based solely upon blood pressure readings.
Benign hypertension remains fairly stable over the years and is
compatible with a long life, but if untreated it is an important risk
factor in coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease.
Malignant hypertension is commonly associated with abrupt onset
and runs a course measured in months. It causes irreversible organ
damage and often ends with renal failure or cerebral hemorrhage.
Usually a person with malignant hypertension complains of
headaches and vision difficulties, and a blood pressure of 200/140 mm
Hg is not uncommon.
Essential
 hypertension is high blood pressure for which the cause is
not known.
Hypertensive heart disease refers to the secondary effects on the
heart of prolonged, sustained, systemic hypertension. The heart has to
work against increased resistance, and that results in high blood
pressure. The primary effect is the thickening of the left ventricle,
which eventually may lead to heart failure.
Primary or essential hypertension may be 
controlled
 (benign) or
uncontrolled
 (malignant, untreated, not responding to treatment) and
both types are reported with I10. If the hypertension is secondary,
report the underlying condition (etiology) with one code and the
hypertension with an I15 code. Secondary hypertension is based on if
the hypertension is due to renal disorder, endocrine disorder, other
secondary hypertension, or unspecified. If the reason for the
encounter is due to the hypertension, sequence the hypertension code
first followed by the code for the etiology; but, if the encounter is due
to etiology, report the etiology first followed by the hypertension
code.
Hypertension may last only temporarily (transient), reported with
R03.0, Elevated blood pressure reading without diagnosis of
hypertension. If the patient has been diagnosed as having high blood
pressure, you cannot subsequently assign a transient hypertension
code. If the hypertension occurs during and due to pregnancy, assign
O13.- or O14.- based on if there is or is not significant proteinuria
(large amount of protein in the urine that results from renal disease or
other abnormal condition).
Kidney disease and hypertension
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.9.a. 3)
Hypertensive heart and chronic kidney disease
Assign codes from combination category I13, Hypertensive heart and
chronic kidney disease, when there is hypertension with both heart
and kidney involvement. If heart failure is present, assign an
additional code from category I50 to identify the type of heart failure.
The appropriate code from category N18, Chronic kidney disease,
should be used as a secondary code with a code from category I13 to
identify the stage of chronic kidney disease.
See Section I.C.14. Chronic kidney disease.
The codes in category I13, Hypertensive heart and chronic kidney
disease, are combination codes that include hypertension, heart
disease and chronic kidney disease. The Includes note at I13 specifies
that the conditions included at I11 and I12 are included together in
I13. If a patient has hypertension, heart disease and chronic kidney
disease then a code from I13 should be used, not individual codes for
hypertension, heart disease and chronic kidney disease, or codes from
I11 or I12.
For patients with both acute renal failure and chronic kidney
disease an additional code for acute renal failure is required.
The Guidelines instruct you to assume that there is a cause-and-
effect relationship between hypertension and chronic kidney disease
reported with N18.-. The physician might not indicate that the
hypertension and chronic kidney disease are related, but the coder is
to assume this relationship.
Chronic renal failure (CRF), chronic kidney disease (CKD), and
chronic renal insufficiency (CRI) when reported with hypertension are
reported as follows:
CRF/CKD/CRI + hypertension
I12.9 + N18.9
CKD stage 1 + hypertension
I12.9 + N18.1
CKD stage 2 + hypertension
I12.9 + N18.2
CKD stage 3 + hypertension
I12.0 + N18.3
CKD stage 4 + hypertension
I12.0 + N18.4
CKD stage 5 + hypertension
I12.0 + N18.5
CKD stage 6 or ESRD or on dialysis +
I12.0 + N18.6
Patient with CKD on any type of dialysis
I12.9 + N18.6 + Z99.2
Myocardial infarction
A myocardial infarction is an acute type of heart attack that occurs
when a coronary artery is totally blocked.
■
 
An 
STEMI
 (ST elevation myocardial infarction) is the most severe
type. The “ST” in STEMI refers to a segment in an
electrocardiogram (ECG), and when the ST segment is elevated
there is heart muscle damage due to occlusion. A STEMI is also
known as a Q-wave or transmural myocardial infarction.
■
 
An 
NSTEMI
 is a non-ST segment acute heart attack and is a less
severe type that occurs when the artery is only partially occluded
that results in the death of only that portion of the 
heart muscle that
is supplied by the affected artery. The ST segment is not elevated on
ECG in the NSTEMI, thus the term non-ST segment myocardial
infarction. The NSTEMI is also known as a non-Q wave or non-
transmural myocardial infarction.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.9.e.
Chapter 9
: diseases of the circulatory system (I00-I99)
e. 
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI)
1) 
ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)
and non ST elevation myocardial infarction
(NSTEMI)
The ICD-10-CM codes for acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) identify the site, such as
anterolateral wall or true posterior wall.
Subcategories I21.0-I21.2 and code I21.
3
 are
used for ST elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI). Code I21.4, Non-ST elevation
(NSTEMI) myocardial infarction, is used for
non ST elevation myocardial infarction
(NSTEMI) and nontransmural MIs.
If NSTEMI evolves to STEMI, assign the STEMI
code. If STEMI converts to NSTEMI due to
thrombolytic therapy, it is still coded as STEMI.
For encounters occurring while the myocardial
infarction is equal to, or less than, four weeks
old, including transfers to another acute setting
or a postacute setting, and the myocardial
infarction meets the definition for “other
diagnoses” (see Section III, Reporting
Additional Diagnoses), codes from category I21
may continue to be reported. For encounters
after the 4 week time frame and the patient is
still receiving care related to the myocardial
infarction, the appropriate aftercare code
should be assigned, rather than a code from
category I21. For old or healed myocardial
infarctions not requiring further care, code
I25.2, Old myocardial infarction, may be
assigned.
2) 
Acute myocardial infarction, unspecified
Code I21.3, ST elevation (STEMI) myocardial
infarction of unspecified site, is the default for
unspecified acute myocardial infarction. If only
STEMI or transmural MI without the site is
documented, assign code I21.3.
3) 
AMI documented as nontransmural or
subendocardial but site provided
If an AMI is documented as nontransmural or
subendocardial, but the site is provided, it is
still coded as a subendocardial AMI.
See Section I.C.21.3 for information on coding status
post administration of tPA in a different facility
within the last 24 hours.
4) 
Subsequent acute myocardial infarction
A code from category I22, Subsequent ST
elevation (STEMI) and non ST elevation
(NSTEMI) myocardial infarction, is to be used
when a patient who has suffered an AMI has a
new AMI within the 4 week time frame of the
initial AMI. A code from category I22 must be
used in conjunction with a code from category
I21. The sequencing of the I22 and I21 codes
depends on the circumstances of the encounter.
Category I21, myocardial infarction (MI), requires specific
documentation to indicate the infarction site. For example, I21.01
reports the left main coronary artery and I21.11 reports the right
coronary artery.
If the documentation does not state the site of the infarction, query
the physician as to the location or assign the default code I21.3.
Examples
I21.01 ST elevation (STEMI) myocardial infarction involving left
main coronary artery
I21.11 ST elevation (STEMI) myocardial infarction involving
right coronary artery
Category I21 STEMI includes the following infarctions:
■
 
cardiac infarction
■
 
coronary artery embolism
■
 
coronary artery occlusion
■
 
coronary artery rupture
■
 
coronary artery thrombosis
■
 
infarction of heart—myocardium or ventricle
Also included in the I21 STEMI is a myocardial infarction specified
as acute or with a stated duration of 
4 weeks (28 days) or less from
acute onset
. Old myocardial infarctions are reported with I25.2 and
subsequent myocardial infarctions are reported with I22.-, Subsequent
ST elevation (STEMI) and non-ST elevation (NSTEMI) myocardial
infarction.
The “Use additional code to identify:” notation at the category I21
directs the coder to also report the following conditions that have a
bearing on the AMI with supplementary code(s):
■
 
exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (Z77.22)
■
 
history of tobacco use (Z87.891)
■
 
occupational exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (Z57.31)
■
 
status post administration of tPA (rtPA) in a different facility within
the last 24 hours prior to admission to current facility (Z92.82)
■
 
tobacco dependence (F17.-)
■
 
tobacco use (Z72.0)
If a patient has an acute myocardial infarction within four weeks
after an initial AMI, report a code from the
■
 
I22 category (Subsequent ST elevation (STEMI) and non-ST
elevation (NSTEMI) myocardial infarction)
and
 a code from the
■
 
I21 category (ST elevation (STEMI) and non-ST elevation (NSTEMI)
myocardial infarction).
The sequencing of the I22 (subsequent MI) and I21 (acute MI)
depends on the reason for the encounter. If the patient experiences an
AMI and is admitted to the hospital and has a subsequent AMI while
in the hospital, report the I21 as the first-listed diagnosis and the I22 as
the secondary code. If the same patient is discharged from the hospital
and then experiences a subsequent AMI, report the I22 as the first-
listed code and the I21 as the secondary code.
EXERCISE 5-11
Diseases of the Circulatory System
Assign codes for the following:
1 
Congestive heart failure
Code: _________________
2 
Acute subendocardial infarction, initial episode
Code: _________________
3 
Treatment for secondary hypertension due to periarteritis nodosa
Codes: _________________, ________________
4 
Cerebral infarction due to arterial thrombosis, brain
Code: _________________
5 
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Code: _________________
6 
Acute renal failure in patient with hypertension
Codes: _________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the respiratory system
Chapter 10
, Diseases of the Respiratory System (J00-J99), in the
Tabular includes diseases and disorders of the respiratory tract,
beginning with the nasal passages and following a path to the lungs.
Note that at the beginning of I-10 
Chapter 10
 there is an instructional
note that covers the entire chapter. The note states, “Use additional
code, where applicable, to identify:” followed by a list of conditions
and supplementary codes, such as exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke (Z77.22).
The blocks in this chapter are as illustrated in 
Fig. 5-24
.
 
FIGURE 5–24
Respiratory system blocks in the I-10.
Assigning ICD-10-CM codes for infectious respiratory diseases,
such as pneumonia.
Identifying Infectious Organisms
Example 1
Diagnosis:
Pneumonia due to 
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Index:
Pneumonia,
 broncho-, bronchial, Klebsiella (pneumoniae), J15.0
Tabular:
J15 Bacterial pneumonia, not elsewhere classified
J15.0 Pneumonia due to Klebsiella pneumoniae
Code:
J15.0 Pneumonia due to 
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Code J15.0 is a combination code that includes the disease process
(pneumonia) with the causative organism 
(Klebsiella pneumoniae).
 In
this instance, you would not assign an additional code because the
organism is identified in the code J15.0.
 
From the Trenches
“Studying and comprehending the guidelines is imperative in ICD-10.
Becoming familiar with chapter-specific guidelines is necessary in knowing
when to use the 6th and/or 7th character. These characters are not optional;
they are intended for use in recording the information documented in the
medical record.”
LETITIA
In the following example, two codes are necessary: one to describe
the disease process (manifestation) and one to indicate the causative
organism (etiology).
Identifying Infectious Organisms
Example 2
Diagnosis:
Acute maxillary sinusitis due to 
Hemophilus influenzae
Index:
Sinusitis (accessory) (chronic) (hyperplastic) (nasal) (nonpurulent) (purulent) J32.9
acute J01.90 - -
maxillary J01.00
Tabular:
J01 Acute sinusitis
J01.0 Acute maxillary sinusitis
J01.00 Acute maxillary sinusitis, unspecified
Index:
Infection, infected, infective
 (opportunistic) B99.9
Hemophilus
influenzae
as cause of disease classified elsewhere B96.3
Tabular:
B96 Other bacterial agents as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B96.3 Hemophilus influenzae [H. influenzae] as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
Codes:
J01.00, B96.3 Acute maxillary sinusitis due to 
Hemophilus influenzae
The manifestation is the first-listed and the etiology is listed
second.
EXERCISE 5-12
Diseases of the Respiratory System
Assign codes for the following:
1 
Croup
Code: ________________
2 
Treatment for respiratory failure due to congestive heart failure
Codes: _______________, _________________
3 
COPD with chronic bronchitis (without exacerbation)
Code: ________________
4 
Influenza with acute bronchitis
Code: ________________
5 
Pneumonia due to 
Hemophilus influenzae
Code: ________________
6 
COPD with emphysema
Code: ________________
7 
Aspiration pneumonia
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
CHAPTER REVIEW
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 5, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What main term in the Index should you locate first to find the
causative organism? _______________________________
2 When a patient presents for management of anemia associated with
a malignancy, and the encounter is for the anemia only, what is
sequenced as the primary diagnosis for this encounter?
___________________________________________
3 Name two types of anemia due to blood loss located as subterms in
the Index. _________________ __________________
4 What type of diabetes mellitus is the default code when the specific
type of diabetes is not documented? _______________
5 What type of code is applied for Dementia with Parkinsonism?
_______________________________________________
6 The default for other postoperative pain not specified as acute or
chronic is the code for what form? __________________
7 Chalazion (infection of the eyelid) codes are based on right or left
eye and what other locations? _____________________
8 What condition is reported as the first-listed diagnosis when otitis
media is the result of an underlying disease? __________________
9 Two codes are required for reporting secondary hypertension.
Sequencing of these codes is based on what? ____________
10 Causative organism is also known as etiology. What is the disease
process also described as? ________________________
11 What Index term is used to locate a diagnosis for acute maxillary
sinusitis due to other bacterial agents? _______________
Chapter 5, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, answer the following:
1 I-10 assumes a relationship between hypertension and renal failure.
True   False
2 If a patient is admitted for an HIV-related condition, the first-listed
diagnosis is the related condition followed by the diagnosis code B20.
True   False
3 A Y90 category code would not be assigned to indicate a blood
alcohol level.
True   False
4 Another term to describe malignant hypertension is accelerated
hypertension.
True   False
5 Hypertension that is caused by another condition is called essential
hypertension.
True   False
6 Status asthmaticus can be assigned if the physician documents an
acute exacerbation.
True   False
7 There is no I-10 to report insulin use.
True   False
8 If a patient receives insulin for diabetes, type 1 diabetes should be
reported.
True   False
9 The site to which a malignant neoplasm has spread is the
_________________.
a metastatic site
b primary site
c benign site
d morphology
10 The site in which a malignant neoplasm originated is the
_________________.
a metastatic site
b primary site
c benign site
d morphology
Chapter 5
, part ii, practical
Using the I-10 and coding guidelines, assign codes for the following:
11 Combined spinal cord degeneration due to pernicious anemia
Codes: ________________, ________________
12 Carcinoma, in situ, of the lip, upper vermilion border
Code: ________________
13 Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Code: ________________
14 Acute bronchitis with chronic obstructive bronchitis
Code: ________________
15 Group B streptococcal pneumonia
Code: ________________
Case study 1
History of present illness
The patient is an 80-year-old female with a known history of
advanced metastatic carcinoma of the breast, which was the primary
site. (The breast cancer is no longer present but has metastasized to
other unspecified areas, which represents a secondary generalized
neoplasm.) The patient has been admitted because of increased
shortness of breath and severe pain. The pain is worse in her left chest,
and this is associated with increased shortness of breath. At the time
of admission, the patient is in so much pain that she is unable to
remember her history. The patient initially presented for congestive
heart failure more than a year earlier. This was subsequently found to
be secondary to metastatic breast cancer, after left mastectomy, 3 years
ago. The patient had previously been on chemotherapy.
Course in hospital
The patient is treated initially with intravenous pain medication to
control her pain, and subsequently her condition becomes stable on
oral medication. By the time of discharge, the patient is stable on oral
Vicodin. She is able to eat. Admission blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was
38 mg/dl with creatinine of 1.3 mg/dl secondary to dehydration. By
the time of discharge, these levels have improved. Admission glucose
of 225 mg/dl is down to 110 mg/dl at discharge.
Discharge diagnoses
Uncontrolled pain, secondary to widely metastatic breast carcinoma
Dehydration
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, uncontrolled
Matching
16 The first-listed diagnosis __________
a 
E11.65
17 Neoplasm __________
b 
Z85.3
18 Volume depletion __________
c 
E86.0
19 Personal history of neoplasm of breast __________
d 
C80.0
20 Uncontrolled type 2 diabetes __________
e 
G89.3
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 6
Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-
10-CM chapters 11-14)
 
“It is important to study the new guidelines because they will help you
to decipher how to select the correct ICD-10 code.”
Genieve R. Nottage, MBA, BSHA, CPC-I, CPMA, CMRS, CMBS
CEO/Owner
 
Chronicles Billing Inc.
 
Stockbridge, Georgia
CHAPTER TOPICS
Diseases of the Digestive System
Diseases of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue
Diseases of the Genitourinary System
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Examine the digestive system coding.
2 
Review coding the skin and subcutaneous tissue diseases.
3 
Understand dis
eases of the musculoskeletal system and connective
tissue coding.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Diseases of the digestive system
Chapter 11
, Diseases of the Digestive System, in the Tabular of the I-10
describes diseases or conditions affecting the digestive system.
Digestion starts when food is taken into the mouth and follows the
gastrointestinal tract until it leaves the body through the anus. The
categories in the I-10 are sequenced in a manner that follows that path,
starting with disorders of the teeth. The blocks in 
Chapter 11
 are as
illustrated in 
Fig. 6-1
.
 
FIGURE 6–1
Blocks of Chapter 11, Diseases of the Digestive System
(K00-K95), of the ICD-10-CM.
Hemorrhage
Throughout the chapter, as in other chapters, you must pay close
attention to additional characters to be assigned, the use of
combination codes, and carefully read the Excludes/Includes notes
and any other instructions. Also important in the chapter is the
presence of 
hemorrhage
 (bleeding) and/or perforation associated with
the disease. Code K92.2, Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, unspecified, is
not assigned when codes for site-specific bleeding exist. Assign this
code only when the physician states “gastric hemorrhage,” “intestinal
hemorrhage,” etc., and no further site is specified. Also, because the
physician may not always indicate the presence of hemorrhage, the
coder must review the record and then clarify the documentation with
the physician before code assignment. There are also combination
codes to report conditions with hemorrhage.
Example
Diagnosis:
Diverticulitis of the colon with perforation and abscess with hemorrhage
Index:
Diverticulitis
 (acute), intestine K57.92, large K57.32, with, abscess, perforation, or peritonitis K57.20, with bleeding
K57.21
Tabular:
K57 Diverticular disease of intestine
K57.2 Diverticulitis of large intestine with perforation and abscess
K57.21 Diverticulitis of large intestine with perforation and abscess with bleeding
 (combination code)
Code:
K57.21 Diverticulitis of colon with perforation and abscess with hemorrhage
If you begin a search for the above diagnosis of “Diverticulitis of
the colon with hemorrhage” using the main term “Hemorrhage,
gastrointestinal,” you are directed to K92.2. When you reference
K92.2 in the Tabular, you will find a list of Excludes1 under the code.
Note that in the list of Excludes1 is “diverticular disease with
hemorrhage (K57.-).” This means that you cannot assign K92.2,
gastrointestinal hemorrhage, when there is a mention of diverticulitis
of the large intestine (K57.-). If you are reporting a diagnosis of
gastrointestinal (GI) hemorrhage with any of the diagnoses listed in
the Excludes1 and if the hemorrhage is due to the GI condition, do
not report K92.2.
Hemorrhage
Example
Diagnosis:
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage due to acute antral ulcer
Index:
Ulcer,
 antral—
see
 Ulcer, stomach
Ulcer,
 stomach (eroded) (peptic) (round) K25.9 acute, with, hemorrhage K25.0
Tabular:
K25 Gastric ulcer
K25.0 Acute gastric ulcer with hemorrhage
The combination code K25.0 reports both the acute gastric ulcer
and the hemorrhage, so no further code is required to report the GI
hemorrhage due to acute antral ulcer.
For a hemorrhage to be reported there does not have to be 
active
bleeding; however, there must be documentation in the medical
record that supports the fact that active bleeding has occurred and the
physician must identify the source of bleeding for a combination code
to be assigned.
It is so important to verify code assignment in the Tabular. It is only
when you reference the Tabular that you know the Includes and
Excludes of a code, which are not listed anywhere else. This is also
where you will find additional characters to be assigned. Be certain to
always, always check the Tabular before assigning a code.
EXERCISE 6-1
Diseases of the Digestive System
Assign I-10 codes for the following:
1 
Appendicitis with generalized peritonitis
Code: ________________
2 
Gastrointestinal bleeding due to acute duodenal ulcer
Code: ________________
3 
Acute and chronic cholecystitis with cholelithiasis
Code: ________________
4 
Gastroenteritis
Code: ________________
5 
Gastroesophageal reflux
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous
tissue
Chapter 12
, Diseases of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue (L00-L99),
in the Tabular of the I-10 describes diseases or conditions of the
integumentary system. Conditions affecting the nails, sweat glands,
hair, and hair follicles are included in this chapter. Congenital
conditions 
of skin, hair, and nails are classified in category Q80-Q89,
Other congenital malformations. Neoplasms of skin are classified in
Chapter 2
 of I-10. The blocks of 
Chapter 12
 include those displayed in
Fig. 6-2
.
 
FIGURE 6–2
Blocks of 
Chapter 12
, Diseases of the Skin and
Subcutaneous Tissue (L00-L99), of the ICD-10-CM.
A “Use additional code” preceding L00 directs the coder to identify
the infectious agent (B95-B97) in addition to the code in the categories
L00-L08, making multiple coding necessary.
Multiple Coding
Example
Diagnosis:
Cellulitis right small finger due to 
Staphylococcus aureus
Index:
Cellulitis
, finger (intrathecal) (periosteal) (subcutaneous) (subcuticular) L03.01-
Tabular:
L03 Cellulitis and acute lymphangitis
L03.0 Cellulitis and acute lymphangitis of finger and toe
L03.01 Cellulitis of finger
L03.011 Cellulitis of right finger
To locate the code for the causative organism, reference the main
term “Infection” in the Index.
Index:
Infection, infected, infective (opportunistic) B99.9
bacterial NOS A49.9
as cause of disease classified elsewhere B96.89
Staphylococcus B95.8
aureus (methicillin susceptible) (MSSA) B95.61
Tabular:
B95 Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B95.6 Staphylococcus aureus as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B96.61 Methicillin susceptible Staphylococcus aureus infection as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
Codes:
L03.011, B95.61 Cellulitis right small finger due to 
Staphylococcus aureus
The code for the organism is assigned as an additional code and is
sequenced after the disease or condition.
Ulcers
Pressure ulcers develop when the circulation to an area is decreased
by the application of pressure to the area. Patients restricted to bed or
unable to change position often develop pressure ulcers. As the sores
ulcerate, the deeper layers of tissue, such as fascia, muscle, and bone,
may be affected. Pressure ulcers are graded and reported based on the
depth of ulcer and categorized in stages as illustrated in 
Fig. 6-3
. The
stages are:
■
 
Stage 1: Erythema (redness) of skin
■
 
Stage 2: Partial loss of skin (epidermis or dermis)
■
 
Stage 3: Full thickness loss of skin (up to but not through fascia)
■
 
Stage 4: Full thickness loss (extensive destruction and necrosis)
 
FIGURE 6–3
Stages 1, 2, 3, and 4 of pressure ulcers.
Fig. 6-4
 illustrates the codes to report pressure ulcer of the left hip
that include the stages in the code description.
 
FIGURE 6–4
Left hip pressure ulcer codes by stage.
Non-pressure ulcers typically result from vascular insufficiencies. A
note at the beginning of category L97, Non-pressure chronic ulcer of
lower limb, not elsewhere classified, directs the coder to report the
underlying conditions first, including diabetes, atherosclerosis,
chronic venous hypertension, among others. Non-pressure ulcer codes
are assigned by the site and depth of the ulcer.
EXERCISE 6-2
Diseases of the Skin and Subcutaneous
Tissue
Assign I-10 codes for the following:
1 
Pruritus vulvae
Code: ________________
2 
Prickly heat
Code: ________________
3 
Pustular, generalized psoriasis
Code: ________________
4 
Decubitus ulcer buttock
Code: ________________
5 
Dermatitis due to poison ivy
Code: ________________
6 
Paronychia toe
Code: ________________
7 
Pilonidal cyst with abscess
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the musculoskeletal
system and connective tissue
Chapter 13
, Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System and Connective
Tissue, in the I-10 Tabular describes diseases or conditions of the bone,
joints, and muscle, and the blocks are displayed in 
Fig. 6-5
.
 
FIGURE 6–5
Blocks of Chapter 13, Diseases of the Musculoskeletal
System and Connective Tissue (M00-M99), of the ICD-10-CM.
Most of the codes in 
Chapter 13
 of the I-10 are specific as to site
(location on the body) and laterality (right, left, unilateral, bilateral).
Fig. 6-6
 displays the site and laterality of category M16 that reports
bilateral (right and left), unilateral (right or left), and unspecified.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.13.
Chapter 13
: diseases of the musculoskeletal system and
connective tissue (M00-M99)
a. 
Site and laterality
Most of the codes within 
Chapter 13
 have site and
laterality designations. The site represents the
bone, joint or the muscle involved. For some
conditions where more than one bone, joint or
muscle is usually involved, such as
osteoarthritis, there is a “multiple sites” code
available. For categories where no multiple site
code is provided and more than one bone, joint
or muscle is involved, multiple codes should be
used to indicate the different sites involved.
1) 
Bone versus joint
For certain conditions, the bone may be affected at
the upper or lower end, (e.g., avascular necrosis
of bone, M87, Osteoporosis, M80, M81). Though
the portion of the bone affected may be at the
joint, the site designation will be the bone, not
the joint.
b. 
Acute traumatic versus chronic or recurrent musculoskeletal
conditions
Many musculoskeletal conditions are a result of
previous injury or trauma to a site, or are
recurrent conditions. Bone, joint or muscle
conditions that are the result of a healed injury
are usually found in 
chapter 13
. Recurrent
bone, joint or muscle conditions are also usually
found in 
chapter 13
. Any current, acute injury
should be coded to the appropriate injury code
from 
chapter 19
. Chronic or recurrent
conditions should generally be coded with a
code from 
chapter 13
. If it is difficult to
determine from the documentation in the
record which code is best to describe a
condition, query the provider.
 
FIGURE 6–6
Category M16 site and laterality specific.
Codes to report previously injured musculoskeletal conditions are
located in 
Chapter 13
, and codes to report current injuries are reported
with codes from 
Chapter 19
.
Infectious arthropathies
Categories M00-M02 report infectious arthropathies due to infections
that are either direct or indirect. A 
direct
 infection is one that invades
the synovial tissue as well as the joint and the invasive organism has
been identified. There are two types of 
indirect
 infections:
■
 
Reactive arthropathy: The microbial infection is identified in the
body but the organism and antigen are not identified in the joint
■
 
Postinfective arthropathy: The microbial antigen (immune response
to presence of microbes) is present but the recovery of the organism
is not constant and there is no evidence that a microorganism is
multiplying
There are three code categories assigned to report infectious
arthropathies: M00, M01, and M02.
M00 reports direct infection from a known organism. 
A code from category M00 is reported first followed by a bacterial
agent (B95.6-B95.7).
M00
Example
Diagnosis:
Staphylococcal aureus
 arthritis of the right wrist joint
Index:
Arthritis, arthritic
 (acute) (chronic) (nonpyogenic) (subacute) M19.90
staphylococcal M00.00 wrist M00.03-
Tabular:
M00 Pyogenic arthritis
M00.0 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis
Use additional code (B95.6-B95.7) to identify bacterial agent
M00.03 Staphylococcal arthritis, wrist
M00.031 Staphylococcal arthritis, right wrist
Pyogenic arthritis (M00) is also known as infectious arthritis or
septic arthritis and is a serious infection of a joint that can damage
both bone and cartilage and has the potential to create septic shock.
M00.031 reports the pyogenic arthritis, but the cause of the
infection must still be reported, which in this example is
Staphylococcal aureus
.
Index:
Infection, infected, infective (opportunistic) B99.9
bacterial NOS A49.9
 as cause of disease classified elsewhere B96.89
  Staphylococcus B95.8
   aureus (methicillin susceptible) (MSSA) B95.61
Tabular:
B95 Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B95.6 Staphylococcus aureus as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
B96.61 Methicillin susceptible Staphylococcus aureus infection as the cause of diseases classified elsewhere
Codes:
M00.031, B95.61 Staphylococcal aureus arthritis of the right wrist joint
There is a “Use additional code” note following M00.0 directing the
coder to report a code from B95.61-B95.8. List the disease condition
first, followed by the organism causing the infection.
M01 reports direct infection of the joint due to infectious
or parasitic disease that is classified elsewhere. 
The infection/parasitic disease is reported first, followed by an M01
code.
M01
Example
The patient presents with paratyphoid fever that has invaded the
right shoulder and has resulted in infectious arthritis of the joint due
to 
Salmonella paratyphi
.
Index:
Arthritis, arthritic
 (acute) (chronic) (nonpyogenic) (subacute) M19.90
due to or associated with
paratyphoid fever (see also Fever, paratyphoid) A01.4 (see also category M01)
Tabular:
A01 Typhoid and paratyphoid fevers
A01.4 Paratyphoid fever, unspecified
Infection due to Salmonella paratyphi NOS
Tabular:
M01 Direct infections of joint in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
M01.X1 Direct infection of shoulder joint in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
M01.X11 Direct infection of right shoulder in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
Code:
A01.4, M01.X11 Paratyphoid fever with infectious arthritis of right shoulder
There is a “Code first” following M01 in the Tabular that directs the
coder to sequence first the underlying disease followed by the M01
code.
M02 reports indirect infections from an unknown
organism. 
The “Code first” note directs coders to report first the underlying
disease.
M02
Example
The patient presents with left shoulder swelling, effusion, pain, and
instability following immunization. Laboratory results could not
confirm the presence of microbial antigens in the joint fluid.
Diagnosis is postimmunization infectious arthritis.
Index:
Arthropathy
 (see also Arthritis) M12.9
postimmunization M02.20
shoulder M02.21-
Tabular:
M02 Postinfective and reactive arthropathies
M02.2 Postimmunization arthropathy
M02.21 Postimmunization arthropathy, shoulder
M02.212 Postimmunization arthropathy, left shoulder
Code:
M02.212 Postimmunization arthropathy
Pathological fractures
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.13.
Chapter 13
: diseases of the musculoskeletal system and
connective tissue (M00-M99)
c. 
Coding of Pathologic Fractures
7
th
 character A is for use as long as the patient is
receiving active treatment for the fracture.
While the patient may be seen by a new or
different provider over the course of treatment
for a pathological fracture, assignment of the 7
th
character is based on whether the patient is
undergoing active treatment and not whether
the provider is seeing the patient for the first
time.
7
th
 character, D is to be used for encounters after
the patient has completed active treatment. The
other 7
th
 characters, listed under each
subcategory in the Tabular List, are to be used
for subsequent encounters for 
routine care of
fractures during the healing and recovery
phase as well as
 treatment of problems
associated with the healing, such as malunions,
nonunions, and sequelae.
Care for complications of surgical treatment for
fracture repairs during the healing or recovery
phase should be coded with the appropriate
complication codes.
See Section I.C.19. Coding of traumatic fractures.
A 
pathologic
 or 
spontaneous
 fracture is a break in a bone that
occurs because of bone disease or a change surrounding the bone
tissue that makes the bone weak. A pathologic fracture is serious
because healing may be delayed by an underlying bone disease. The
fracture is reported in addition to the disease process responsible for
the fracture, such as osteoporosis or metastatic cancer of the bone. It is
also possible to have a small trauma associated with a pathologic
fracture. For example, an elderly woman with severe osteoporosis
bumps her hip against the doorway and sustains a hip fracture. This is
a pathologic fracture because a person with healthy bones would not
have fractured a hip as the result of a slight bump into a doorway. If
there is any question about whether a fracture was pathologic or due
to trauma, query the physician as to the cause of the fracture. If a
pathologic fracture is documented and no other disease process is
indicated, review the record or clarify the underlying cause of the
fracture with the physician.
Never assign a code for a traumatic fracture and a pathologic
fracture of the same bone.
According to the Guidelines for pathological fractures, the 7th
character A (initial encounter) is assigned as long as the patient is
receiving active treatment for a fracture, such as surgical treatment,
emergency treatment, or evaluation/management by a physician other
than the original physician. The 7th character D (subsequent
encounter) is assigned when all active treatment has been completed.
The 7th characters G, K, and P are assigned for subsequent, non-
routine encounters (i.e., delayed healing, nonunion, malunion). The
7th character S is reported for a sequela.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.13.
Chapter 13
: diseases of the musculoskeletal system and
connective tissue (M00-M99)
d. 
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a systemic condition, meaning
that all bones of the musculoskeletal system are
affected. Therefore, site is not a component of
the codes under category M81, Osteoporosis
without current pathological fracture. The site
codes under category M80, Osteoporosis with
current pathological fracture, identify the site of
the fracture, not the osteoporosis.
1) 
Osteoporosis without pathological fracture
Category M81, Osteoporosis without current
pathological fracture, is for use for patients with
osteoporosis who do not currently have a
pathologic fracture due to the osteoporosis,
even if they have had a fracture in the past. For
patients with a history of osteoporotic fractures,
status code Z87.310, Personal history of (healed)
osteoporosis fracture, should follow the code
from M81.
2) 
Osteoporosis with current pathological
fracture
Category M80, Osteoporosis with current
pathological fracture, is for patients who have a
current pathologic fracture at the time of an
encounter. The codes under M80 identify the
site of the fracture. A code from category M80,
not a traumatic fracture code, should be used
for any patient with known osteoporosis who
suffers a fracture, even if the patient had a
minor fall or trauma, if that fall or trauma
would not usually break a normal, healthy
bone.
Pathologic Fracture
Example
Diagnosis:
Pathologic fracture of the first metatarsal, right foot, due to age-related postmenopausal osteoporosis, initial
encounter
Index:
Fracture, pathological
 M84.40 -
due to
osteoporosis M80.80
postmenopausal- 
see
 Osteoporosis postmenopausal, with pathologic fracture
Index:
Osteoporosis
 (female) (male) M81.0
postmenopausal, with pathological fracture M80.00
metatarsus M80.07-
Tabular:
M80.0 Age-related osteoporosis with current pathological fracture
Involutional osteoporosis with current pathological fracture
Osteoporosis NOS with current pathological fracture
Postmenopausal osteoporosis with current pathological fracture
Senile osteoporosis with current pathological fracture
M80.07 Age-related osteoporosis with current pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.071 Age-related osteoporosis with current pathological fracture, right ankle and foot
Code:
M80.071A Pathologic fracture of the right metatarsal due to age-related postmenopausal osteoporosis, initial
encounter
EXERCISE 6-3
Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System
and Connective Tissue
Assign I-10 codes for the following:
1 
Rheumatoid arthritis
Code: ________________
2 
Pain in the neck
Code: ________________
3 
Recurrent dislocation, right shoulder
Code: ________________
4 
Initial encounter for spontaneous fracture left humerus due to
metastatic bone cancer; history of cancer of the breast previously
excised
Codes: ________________ (fracture),
________________ (neoplasm),
________________ (history of)
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diseases of the genitourinary system
Chapter 14
 in the I-10 Tabular is Diseases of the Genitourinary System
(N00-N99). This chapter contains codes to report diagnoses of the
male genitalia (N40-N53), female genitalia (N70-N98), breast (N60-
N65), and urinary system (N00-N39). One of the most common
disorders reported with codes from 
Chapter 14
 are kidney stones
located in the Index under the main term, “Calculus.”
Kidney Stone
Example
Diagnosis:
Flank pain with dysuria and emesis, with 3 renal calculi visible on x-ray.
Index:
Calculus, calculi, calculous
kidney N20.0
Tabular:
N20 Calculus of kidney and ureter
N20.0 Calculus of kidney
Code:
N20.0 Calculus of kidney
Category N18 reports the diagnosis of chronic kidney disease
(CKD) according to the stage. When the kidneys are no longer able to
adequately filter urine, the patient’s CKD is termed end stage renal
disease (ESRD). When the patient has ESRD, regular dialysis or a
transplanted kidney is required to sustain life. When a patient is
receiving dialysis, also report dialysis status (Z99.2). CKD is a
common complication of diabetes, and there are combination codes to
report CKD due to diabetes. The combination code is listed first,
followed by a code that identifies the stage of the CKD.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.14.
a. Chronic kidney disease
1) 
Stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD)
The ICD-10-CM classifies CKD based on severity.
The severity of CKD is designated by stages 1-5.
Stage 2, code N18.2, equates to mild CKD; stage
3, code N18.3, equates to moderate CKD; and
stage 4, code N18.4, equates to severe CKD.
Code N18.6, End stage renal disease (ESRD), is
assigned when the provider has documented
end-stage-renal disease (ESRD).
If both a stage of CKD and ESRD are documented,
assign code N18.6 only.
3) 
Chronic kidney disease with other conditions
Patients with CKD may also suffer from other
serious conditions, most commonly diabetes
mellitus and hypertension. The sequencing of
the CKD code in relationship to codes for other
contributing conditions is based on the
conventions in the Tabular List.
See I.C.9. Hypertensive chronic kidney disease.
See I.C.19. Chronic kidney disease and kidney
transplant complications
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 6, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 Exclude and Include notes are only referenced where?
_______________________________________________________
2 Pressure ulcers are graded and reported based on the stage of the
ulcer and ______________________________________.
3 When a disease is documented as a portion of the bone at the joint,
which site designation should be reported? __________
Chapter 6, part I, theory
Circle the correct answer in each of the following:
1 In order to code a gastrointestinal condition with hemorrhage, active
bleeding must be present.
True   False
2 Which of the following is not included in the blocks of the Digestive
System?
a hernia
b liver
c pancreas
d kidney
3 A pathologic fracture occurs in a bone that is weakened by disease.
True   False
4 Which of the following is not included in the blocks of the Diseases
of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue?
a spondylopathies
b eczema
c erythema
d bullous disorders
Match the following pressure ulcer stages to the correct description of the
stage.
5 Stage 1 ________________
6 Stage 2 ________________
7 Stage 3 ________________
8 Stage 4 ________________
a full thickness loss of skin (up to but not through fascia)
b erythema (redness) of skin
c full thickness loss (extensive destruction and necrosis)
d partial loss of skin (epidermis or dermis)
9 When a patient with osteoporosis falls and fractures a bone, the
Guidelines instruct us to report this as a pathological fracture due to
osteoporosis (Category M80), not as a fracture due to an injury.
True   False
10 Most of the codes in 
Chapter 13
 are specific to site and include
laterality.
True   False
Chapter 6, part II, practical
Using an I-10 manual, answer the following questions:
11 Crohn’s disease with rectal bleeding
Code: ________________
12 Diaphragmatic hernia with gangrene
Code: ________________
13 Recurrent dislocation, right shoulder
Code: ________________
14 Dermatitis due to poison ivy
Code: ________________
15 Paronychia toe
Code: ________________
16 Anal fistula
Code: ________________
17 Lower gastrointestinal bleeding due to angiodysplasia of colon
Code: ________________
18 Diverticulum of appendix
Code: ________________
19 Acute and chronic cholecystitis with cholelithiasis
Code: ________________
20 Mr. Jones presents to the emergency department with acute
abdominal pain. After a thorough examination and diagnostic x-ray
film, Mr. Jones is diagnosed with acute small bowel obstruction and
taken immediately to surgery.
Code: ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 7
Chapter-specific guidelines (ICD-
10-CM chapters 15-21)
 
“Education is vital for success with ICD-10. It is essential to
understand the I-10 Official Guidelines and format of the new codes,
learn the correct applications which provide specificity, and be able to
translate medical record documentation in order to become proficient
with this system.”
Patricia Cordy Henricksen, MS, CHCA, CPC-I, CPC, CCP-P, ACS-PM
Auditing and Coding Educator
 
Soterion Medical Services
 
Lexington, Kentucky
CHAPTER TOPICS
Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the Puerperium
Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period
Congenital Malformations, Deformations, and Chromosomal
Abnormalities
Symptoms, Signs and Abnormal Clinical and Laboratory Findings,
Not Elsewhere Classified
Injury, Poisoning, and Certain Other Consequences of External
Causes
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Review the pregnancy, childbirth, and puerperium coding.
2 
Report services of certain conditions originating in the perinatal
period.
3 
Examine the congenital malformations, deformities, and
chromosomal abnormalities.
4 
Define the rules of symptoms, signs, and abnormal clinical and
laboratory findings that are not elsewhere classified.
5 
Identify the e
lements of coding injury, poisonings, and certain other
consequences of external causes.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Pregnancy, childbirth, and the
puerperium
Chapter 15
, Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the Puerperium (O00-O9A), of
the Tabular of the I-10 is a difficult chapter from which to report
diagnoses. One reason is that pregnancy and childbirth are natural
functions, and physicians often overlook documentation of diagnoses
that should be reported. Another reason the coding is complex is that
there is extensive use of multiple coding in I-10 
Chapter 15
. There are
instructions throughout this chapter that must be read thoroughly.
Obstetric coding can also be difficult because you may not use this
chapter as frequently as some of the other chapters, so you won’t be as
familiar with the notes and coding instructions. Any condition that
occurs during pregnancy, childbirth, or the puerperium is considered
to be a complication unless the attending physician specifically
documents that it neither 
affects
 the pregnancy nor is 
affected by
 the
pregnancy.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
a. 
General Rules for Obstetric Cases
1) 
Codes from
 
chapter 15
 
and sequencing
priority
Obstetric cases require codes from 
chapter 15
,
codes in the range O00-O9A, Pregnancy,
Childbirth, and the Puerperium. 
Chapter 15
codes have sequencing priority over codes from
other chapters. Additional codes from other
chapters may be used in conjunction with
chapter 15
 codes to further specify conditions.
Should the provider document that the
pregnancy is incidental to the encounter, then
code Z33.1, Pregnant state, incidental, should
be used in place of any 
chapter 15
 codes. It is
the provider’s responsibility to state that the
condition being treated is not affecting the
pregnancy.
c. 
Pre-existing conditions versus conditions due to the pregnancy
Certain categories in 
Chapter 15
 distinguish
between conditions of the mother that existed
prior to pregnancy (pre-existing) and those that
are a direct result of pregnancy. When
assigning codes from 
Chapter 15
, it is important
to assess if a condition was pre-existing prior to
pregnancy or developed during or due to the
pregnancy in order to assign the correct code.
Categories that do not distinguish between pre-
existing and pregnancy-related conditions may
be used for either. It is acceptable to use codes
specifically for the puerperium with codes
complicating pregnancy and childbirth if a
condition arises postpartum during the delivery
encounter.
General rules of obstetric diagnosis reporting
Chapter 15
 codes are never used on the newborn’s record because
they are only used on the mother’s record.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15. a.
Chapter 15
: pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
2) 
Chapter 15
 
codes used only on the maternal record
Chapter 15
 codes are to be used only on the
maternal record, never on the record of the
newborn.
First-listed diagnosis in normal pregnancy
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
b. 
Selection of OB Principal or First-listed Diagnosis
1) 
Routine outpatient prenatal visits
For routine outpatient prenatal visits when no
complications are present, a code from category
Z34, Encounter for supervision of normal
pregnancy, should be used as the first-listed
diagnosis. These codes should not be used in
conjunction with 
chapter 15
 codes.
Routine outpatient prenatal visits are reported with codes from
category Z34, Encounter for supervision of normal pregnancy, as the
first-listed diagnosis. If there is any type of complication, such as those
reported with O00-O9A, Z34 codes cannot be reported. For example, if
the patient encounter was for the supervision of a normal first
pregnancy in the first trimester, assign Z34.01, Encounter for
supervision of normal first pregnancy, first trimester.
First-listed diagnosis in high-risk patients
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
b. 
Selection of OB Principal or First-listed Diagnosis
2) 
Prenatal outpatient visits for high-risk
patients
For routine prenatal outpatient visits for patients
with high-risk pregnancies, a code from
category O09, Supervision of high-risk
pregnancy, should be used as the first-listed
diagnosis. Secondary 
chapter 15
 codes may be
used in conjunction with these codes if
appropriate.
Some patients are considered high-risk for complication during
pregnancy, such as neonatal death. When encounters are for high-risk
patients, report a code from category O09, Supervision of high-risk
pregnancy. For example, a patient in her first trimester presents for an
office visit with her obstetrician. The patient’s first pregnancy ended
in neonatal death. Report O09.291, Supervision of pregnancy with
other poor reproductive or obstetric history, first trimester.
First-listed diagnosis for delivery
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15
Chapter 15
: Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
b. 
Selection of OB Principal or First-listed Diagnosis
3) 
Episodes when no delivery occurs
In episodes when no delivery occurs, the principal
diagnosis should correspond to the principal
complication of the pregnancy which
necessitated the encounter. Should more than
one complication exist, all of which are treated
or monitored, any of the complications codes
may be sequenced first.
4) 
When a delivery occurs
When a delivery occurs, the principal diagnosis
should correspond to the main circumstances or
complication of the delivery. In cases of
cesarean delivery, the selection of the principal
diagnosis should be the condition established
after study that was responsible for the
patient’s admission. If the patient was admitted
with a condition that resulted in the
performance of a cesarean procedure, that
condition should be selected as the principal
diagnosis. If the reason for
admission/encounter was unrelated to the
condition resulting in the cesarean delivery, the
condition related to the reason for the
admission/encounter should be selected as the
principal diagnosis.
5) 
Outcome of delivery
A code from category Z37, Outcome of delivery,
should be included on every maternal record
when a delivery has occurred. These codes are
not to be used on subsequent records or on the
newborn record.
The outcome of delivery is indicated only on the 
mother’s
 medical
record. For example, the mother gives birth to a single live born,
reported with Z37.0. The outcome of delivery is only reported once on
the mother’s record and is not reported on subsequent encounters.
Trimesters
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15
Chapter 15
: Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
a. 
General Rules for Obstetric cases
3) 
Final character for trimester
The majority of codes in 
Chapter 15
 have a final
character indicating the trimester of pregnancy.
The timeframes for the trimesters are indicated
at the beginning of the chapter. If trimester is
not a component of a code it is because the
condition always occurs in a specific trimester,
or the concept of trimester of pregnancy is not
applicable. Certain codes have characters for
only certain trimesters because the condition
does not occur in all trimesters, but it may
occur in more than just one.
Assignment of the final character for trimester
should be based on the provider’s
documentation of the trimester (or number of
weeks) for the current admission/encounter.
This applies to the assignment of trimester for
pre-existing conditions as well as those that
develop during or are due to the pregnancy.
The provider’s documentation of the number of
weeks may be used to assign the appropriate
code identifying the trimester.
Whenever delivery occurs during the current
admission, and there is an “in childbirth”
option for the obstetric complication being
coded, the “in childbirth” code should be
assigned.
4) 
Selection of trimester for inpatient admissions
that encompass more than one trimester
In instances when a patient is admitted to a
hospital for complications of pregnancy during
one trimester and remains in the hospital into a
subsequent trimester, the trimester character for
the antepartum complication code should be
assigned on the basis of the trimester when the
complication developed, not the trimester of the
discharge. If the condition developed prior to
the current admission/encounter or represents a
pre-existing condition, the trimester character
for the trimester at the time of the
admission/encounter should be assigned.
5) 
Unspecified trimester
Each category that includes codes for trimester
has a code for “unspecified trimester.” The
“unspecified trimester” code should rarely be
used, such as when the documentation in the
record is insufficient to determine the trimester
and it is not possible to obtain clarification.
Trimesters are indicated on many of the codes in 
Chapter 15
.
Trimesters are calculated from the first day of the last menstrual
period (LMP) and are as follows:
■
 
First trimester
less than 14 weeks 0 days from LMP
■
 
Second trimester
14 weeks 0 days to less than 28 weeks 0 days from LMP
■
 
Third trimester
28 weeks 0 days from LMP until delivery occurs
Specific gestation weeks are assigned category Z3A codes in order
to provide additional information about the pregnancy.
Codes from 
Chapter 15
 have priority over codes from other
chapters. Although additional codes may be reported for further
detail, the 
Chapter 15
 code is first-listed. It is the physician’s
responsibility to document that the condition or conditions being
treated 
are not
 affecting the pregnancy. In the absence of this
documentation, assume the condition 
is
 affecting the pregnancy.
There are codes for unspecified trimester; however, they should
only be used if there is no further information available to determine
the correct trimester.
 
QUICK CHECK 7-1
1. 
First trimester
2. 
Second trimester
3. 
Third trimester
less than __________ weeks 0 days from LMP
__________ weeks 0 days to less than
__________ weeks 0 days from LMP
__________ weeks 0 days until delivery occurs
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
There are times when the first-listed diagnosis for a pregnant female
will not be a 
Chapter 15
 code:
■
 
If the physician documents that the pregnancy is 
incidental
 to the
encounter, report Z33.1, Pregnant state, incidental, as a
supplemental diagnosis and the reason for the encounter as the
first-listed diagnosis.
■
 
Encounter for a complication at which no delivery occurs, report the
complication of pregnancy as the first-listed diagnosis.
There are conditions that are due to pregnancy, and those same
conditions that may have been present prior to pregnancy, such as
hypertension, are shown in 
Fig. 7-1
. If the category does not state pre-
existing or pregnancy-related condition, the category may be assigned
to either.
 
FIGURE 7–1
Pre-existing hypertension.
Peripartum and postpartum periods
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
o. 
The Peripartum and Postpartum Periods
1) 
Peripartum and Postpartum periods
The postpartum period begins immediately after
delivery and continues for six weeks following
delivery. The peripartum period is defined as
the last month of pregnancy to five months
postpartum.
2) 
Peripartum and postpartum complication
A postpartum complication is any complication
occurring within the six-week period.
3) 
Pregnancy-related complications after 6 week
period
Chapter 15
 codes may also be used to describe
pregnancy-related complications after the
peripartum or postpartum period if the
provider documents that a condition is
pregnancy related.
4) 
Admission for routine postpartum care
following delivery outside hospital
When the mother delivers outside the hospital
prior to admission and is admitted for routine
postpartum care and no complications are
noted, code Z39.0, Encounter for care and
examination of mother immediately after
delivery, should be assigned as the principal
diagnosis.
5) 
Pregnancy associated cardiomyopathy
Pregnancy associated cardiomyopathy, code
O90.3, is unique in that it may be diagnosed in
the third trimester of pregnancy but may
continue to progress months after delivery. For
this reason, it is referred to as peripartum
cardiomyopathy. Code O90.3 is only for use
when the cardiomyopathy develops as a result
of pregnancy in a woman who did not have
pre-existing heart disease.
The time periods of pregnancy are:
■
 
Peripartum
last month of pregnancy to 5 months postpartum
■
 
Postpartum
immediately after delivery to 6 weeks after delivery
If the patient has a pregnancy-related complication after the
peripartum and postpartum periods of time, the physician must
document that the condition is pregnancy-related in order to assign
Chapter 15
 codes.
If the mother delivers outside the hospital, report the first-listed
diagnosis as Z39.0, Encounter for care and examination of mother
immediately after delivery.
Normal delivery
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
n. 
Normal Delivery, Code O80
1) 
Encounter for full term uncomplicated
delivery
Code O80 should be assigned when a woman is
admitted for a full-term normal delivery and
delivers a single, healthy infant without any
complications antepartum, during the delivery,
or postpartum during the delivery episode.
Code O80 is always a principal diagnosis. It is
not to be used if any other code from 
chapter 15
is needed to describe a current complication of
the antenatal, delivery, or perinatal period.
Additional codes from other chapters may be
used with code O80 if they are not related to or
are in any way complicating the pregnancy.
2) 
Uncomplicated delivery with resolved
antepartum complication
Code O80 may be used if the patient had a
complication at some point during the
pregnancy, but the complication is not present
at the time of the admission for delivery.
3) 
Outcome of delivery for O80
Z37.0, Single live birth, is the only outcome of
delivery code appropriate for use with O80.
O80 is reported as the first-listed diagnosis for a full-term,
uncomplicated delivery of a single, healthy infant without any
complications before, during, or after the delivery. If the patient had
antepartum complications, but that complication is not present at
delivery, you can still report a normal delivery with O80.
The outcome of an 
O80
 delivery is reported with 
Z37.0,
 Single live
birth. No other outcome of delivery code would be correct to report
with O80.
QUICK CHECK 7-2
 
1. 
According to the Guidelines, the only birth outcome code that can
be reported with O80 is ________________.
2. 
O80 is always listed ________________.
3. 
Additional codes from other chapters may be used with code O80 if
they are not related to or are in any way ________________ the
pregnancy.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Ectopic pregnancy
An ectopic pregnancy is one in which the fertilized ovum implants
outside the uterus, usually in the fallopian tube. Ectopic pregnancy
includes ruptured ectopic pregnancies and is reported with a code
from category O00 based on the location of the pregnancy (abdominal,
tubal, ovarian, other, unspecified) and with or without intrauterine
pregnancy. If there are any complications with the ectopic pregnancy,
report those associated complications with a code from category O08,
Complications following ectopic and molar pregnancy.
Hydatidiform mole
A hydatidiform mole is a tumor of the placenta that secretes
hormones (chorionic gonadotropic hormone, CGH) and is shown in
Fig. 7-2
.
 
FIGURE 7–2
Hydatidiform mole.
A hydatidiform mole is reported with a category O01 code.
Malignant hydatidiform moles are reported with D39.2 (Neoplasm of
uncertain behavior of placenta). If there is a complication with the
hydatidiform mole, report a code from category O08, Complications
following ectopic and molar pregnancy.
Hypertension in pregnancy
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
d. 
Pre-existing hypertension in pregnancy
Category O10, Pre-existing hypertension
complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium, includes codes for hypertensive
heart and hypertensive chronic kidney disease.
When assigning one of the O10 codes that
includes hypertensive heart disease or
hypertensive chronic kidney disease, it is
necessary to add a secondary code from the
appropriate hypertension category to specify
the type of heart failure or chronic kidney
disease.
See Section I.C.9. Hypertension.
When hypertension is a pre-existing condition that complicates
pregnancy, delivery, or the five-month period after delivery, report
the condition with a category O10 code, Pre-existing hypertension
complicating pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium. The category
O10 code is the first-listed diagnosis, and a secondary code is assigned
to report any hypertensive heart disease or hypertensive chronic
kidney disease.
Pre-Existing Hypertension
Example
A pregnant patient is seen by her obstetrician in her first trimester
for a routine prenatal check. The patient has pre-existing stage I
hypertensive chronic kidney disease that is complicating her
pregnancy.
Report 
O10.211
, Pre-existing hypertensive chronic kidney disease
complicating pregnancy, first trimester; and 
I12.9
, Hypertensive
chronic kidney disease with stage 1 through stage 4 chronic kidney
disease, or unspecified chronic kidney disease. The notes following
code I12.9 state to use an additional code to identify the stage of
chronic renal disease; therefore, add 
N18.1
 (Disease, kidney, chronic,
stage 1).
Fetal conditions
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
e. 
Fetal Conditions Affecting the Management of the Mother
1) 
Codes from categories O35 and O36
Codes from categories O35, Maternal care for
known or suspected fetal abnormality and
damage, and O36, Maternal care for other fetal
problems, are assigned only when the fetal
condition is actually responsible for modifying
the management of the mother, i.e., by
requiring diagnostic studies, additional
observation, special care, or termination of
pregnancy. The fact that the fetal condition
exists does not justify assigning a code from
this series to the mother’s record.
2) 
In utero surgery
In cases when surgery is performed on the fetus, a
diagnosis code from category O35, Maternal
care for known or suspected fetal abnormality
and damage, should be assigned identifying the
fetal condition. Assign the appropriate
procedure code for the procedure performed.
No code from 
Chapter 16
, the perinatal codes,
should be used on the mother’s record to
identify fetal conditions. Surgery performed in
utero on a fetus is still to be coded as an
obstetric encounter.
Categories O35 and O36 report fetal abnormalities or other fetal
problems when these abnormalities or problems affect the care of the
mother. If the abnormality or problem is present but does not affect
the care of the mother, O35 and O36 are NOT reported. It is only when
these conditions exist and do affect the mother’s care that O35 or O36
are reported.
TOOLBOX 7-1
 
Carol Jean is a 35-year-old alcoholic in her second trimester with a
single fetus. She continues to consume 4-5 drinks daily that contain
alcohol. Her OB/GYN is concerned about the slow growth of the fetus
and has asked Dr. Zahn, a specialist in fetal alcohol disorders, to
provide a consultation regarding suspected fetal alcohol syndrome
(FAS).
Questions
1. 
When you reference “Pregnancy, complicated by, fetal, damage
from, maternal, alcohol addiction,” what code are you directed to
locate in the Tabular? ___________________________
2. 
Within the Tabular, the code you reference only has 4 characters,
but there are 7th characters to assign to the code. What symbol is
placed in the 5th and 6th character position?
___________________________________
3. 
What 7th character is assigned to the code to indicate the fetal
number? ___________________________
4. 
What would be the code to report the diagnosis for Carol Jean?
__________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.15.
Chapter 15
: Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
(O00-O9A)
g. 
Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy
Diabetes mellitus is a significant complicating
factor in pregnancy. Pregnant women who are
diabetic should be assigned a code from
category O24, Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy,
childbirth, and the puerperium, first, followed
by the appropriate diabetes code(s) (E08-E13)
from 
Chapter 4
.
h. 
Long term use of insulin and oral hypoglycemics
Code Z79.4, Long-term (current) use of insulin, 
or
code Z79.84, Long-term (current) use of oral
hypoglycemic drugs,
 should also be assigned if
the diabetes mellitus is being treated with
insulin 
or oral medications. If the patient is
treated with both oral medications and
insulin, only the code for insulin-controlled
should be assigned.
i. 
Gestational (pregnancy induced) diabetes
Gestational (pregnancy induced) diabetes can
occur during the second and third trimester of
pregnancy in women who were not diabetic
prior to pregnancy. Gestational diabetes can
cause complications in the pregnancy similar to
those of pre-existing diabetes mellitus. It also
puts the woman at greater risk of developing
diabetes after the pregnancy. Codes for
gestational diabetes are in subcategory O24.4,
Gestational diabetes mellitus. No other code
from category O24, Diabetes mellitus in
pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium,
should be used with a code from O24.4
The codes under subcategory O24.4 include diet
controlled, insulin controlled, 
and controlled
by oral hypoglycemic drugs.
 If a patient with
gestational diabetes is treated with both diet
and insulin, only the code for insulin-controlled
is required. 
If a patient with gestational
diabetes is treated with both diet and oral
hypoglycemic medications, only the code for
“controlled by oral hypoglycemic drugs” is
required.
 Code Z79.4, Long-term (current) use
of insulin or code Z79.84, 
Long-term (current)
use of oral hypoglycemic drugs,
 should not be
assigned with codes from subcategory O24.4.
An abnormal glucose tolerance in pregnancy is
assigned a code from subcategory O99.81,
Abnormal glucose complicating pregnancy,
childbirth, and the puerperium.
Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus during pregnancy can lead to
serious complications for both the mother and the fetus and may
result in miscarriage or stillbirth. 
Type 1
 diabetes is a condition in
which little or no insulin is produced by the body and is controlled
with administration of insulin. 
Type 2
 diabetes is a condition in which
too little insulin is produced or the body cannot use the insulin that is
produced and is controlled with dietary restrictions and medications
and/or insulin.
If the pregnant female has type 2 diabetes mellitus that is well
controlled with the use of insulin or oral medication, you would
report a code from category 
O24
, Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy,
childbirth, and the puerperium, as the first-listed diagnosis followed
by a code to report the type of diabetes, 
E11.9,
 Type 2 diabetes
mellitus without complications. If the patient’s diabetes has been and
currently is being controlled with insulin, report 
Z79.4
, Long-term
(current) use of insulin, as a supplemental code.
Gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops in the
second or third trimester of pregnancy in women who did not have
either type of diabetes prior to pregnancy. This type of diabetes may
be controlled through dietary restrictions or insulin, depending on the
severity of the condition and is reported with a code from category
O24, Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium.
Code Z79.4, Long-term (current) use of insulin, would not be assigned
in gestational diabetes.
EXERCISE 7-1
Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the
Puerperium
Assign I-10 codes for the following:
1 
Blighted ovum
Code: ________________
2 
Incomplete spontaneous abortion, uncomplicated; dilation and
curettage (D&C) performed
Code: ________________
3 
False labor of 38-week pregnancy, undelivered
Code: ________________
4 
Vaginal delivery of liveborn single infant with fourth-degree
perineal laceration; obstetric laceration repaired (include
appropriate Z code for outcome of delivery)
Codes: ________________ (laceration),
________________ (outcome)
5 
Obstructed labor due to fetopelvic disproportion; liveborn single
infant delivered by lower segment cesarean section
Codes: ________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Certain conditions originating in the
perinatal period
Chapter 16
, Newborn (Perinatal) Guidelines (P00-P96), contains codes
for the perinatal period, which is before birth through 28 days after
birth. The blocks in this chapter are as shown in 
Fig. 7-3
.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period
SECTION I.C.16.
Chapter 16
: Certain conditions originating in the perinatal
period (p00-p96)
For coding and reporting purposes the perinatal period is defined as
before birth through the 28th day following birth. The following
guidelines are provided for reporting purposes
a. 
General Perinatal Rules
1) 
Use of
 
Chapter 16
 
Codes
Codes in this chapter are 
never
 for use on the
maternal record. Codes from 
Chapter 15
, the
obstetric chapter, are never permitted on the
newborn record. 
Chapter 16
 codes may be used
throughout the life of the patient if the
condition is still present.
 
FIGURE 7–3
Blocks in Chapter 16, Certain Conditions Originating in
the Perinatal Period (P00-P96).
Codes from 
Chapter 16
 are only for the 
newborn record
 and are
never reported on the maternal record. These codes do not report
congenital malformations, deformities, or chromosomal abnormalities;
rather, those conditions are reported with codes in the Q00-Q99 range.
First-listed diagnosis
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period
SECTION I.C.16.a.
Chapter 16
: Certain conditions originating in the perinatal
period (p00-p96)
2) 
Principal Diagnosis for Birth Record
When coding the birth episode in a newborn
record, assign a code from category Z38,
Liveborn infants according to place of birth and
type of delivery, as the principal diagnosis. A
code from category Z38 is assigned only once,
to a newborn at the time of birth. If a newborn
is transferred to another institution, a code from
category Z38 should not be used at the
receiving hospital.
A code from category Z38 is used only on the
newborn record, not on the mother’s record.
The first-listed diagnosis on the 
newborn
 record is a category Z38
code, Liveborn according to place of birth and type of delivery. This
category is for use as the first-listed code on the 
initial
 record of a
newborn. It is to be assigned for the initial birth record only, and it is
never to be used on the mother’s record. For example, Z38.1, Single
liveborn infant, born outside hospital, is reported only on the initial
newborn record and is never reported on the mother’s record.
Congenital malformations,
deformations and chromosomal
abnormalities
Chapter 17
, Congenital Malformations, Deformations and
Chromosomal Abnormalities (Q00-Q99), in the I-10 Tabular describes
congenital anomalies and conditions that originate in the perinatal
period. The perinatal period extends through the 28 days following
birth. The term 
perinatal
 applies only to the baby and 
postpartum
applies to the mother. Codes from 
Chapter 17
 can be assigned beyond
the time frame of perinatal period, but as the chapter title indicates,
the condition must have 
originated
 during the perinatal period.
The blocks of 
Chapter 17
 are as illustrated in 
Fig. 7-4
.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.17.
Chapter 17
: Congenital malformations, deformations, and
chromosomal abnormalities (q00-q99)
Assign an appropriate code(s) from categories Q00-Q99, Congenital
malformations, deformations, and chromosomal abnormalities when
a malformation/deformation or chromosomal abnormality is
documented. A malformation/deformation/or chromosomal
abnormality may be the principal/first-listed diagnosis on a record or
a secondary diagnosis.
When a malformation/deformation/or chromosomal abnormality
does not have a unique code assignment, assign additional code(s) for
any manifestations that may be present.
When the code assignment specifically identifies the
malformation/deformation/or chromosomal abnormality,
manifestations that are an inherent component of the anomaly should
not be coded separately. Additional codes should be assigned for
manifestations that are not an inherent component.
Codes from 
Chapter 17
 may be used throughout the life of the
patient. If a congenital malformation or deformity has been corrected,
a personal history code should be used to identify the history of the
malformation or deformity. Although present at birth,
malformation/deformation/or chromosomal abnormality may not be
identified until later in life. Whenever the condition is diagnosed by
the physician, it is appropriate to assign a code from codes Q00-Q99.
For the birth admission, the appropriate code from category Z38,
Liveborn infants, according to place of birth and type of delivery,
should be sequenced as the principal diagnosis, followed by any
congenital anomaly codes, Q00-Q99.
 
FIGURE 7–4
Blocks in Chapter 17, Congenital Malformations,
Deformations and Chromosomal Abnormalities (Q00-Q99).
An 
anomaly
 is an abnormality of a structure or organ. 
Congenital
anomaly means that it is an abnormality that one was born with. Some
anomalies are noticeable and discovered at birth. In cases of other
anomalies, it may be a number of months or even years before the
anomaly is diagnosed. If there is a question as to whether a condition
was acquired or congenital, you should review the record or query the
physician. The physician must document the abnormality, and the
abnormality may be either the first-listed diagnosis or an additional
diagnosis.
If a patient is admitted for the purpose of birthing, report a code
from category Z38, Liveborn infant according to type of birth, and
sequence the Z38 code as the first-listed diagnosis. The Z38 code is
assigned only once and on the birth record of the newborn because
the Z38 code indicates the type of birth. If any other conditions or
congenital anomalies are documented, report them as secondary
diagnoses.
Newborn Congenital Anomalies
Example
Diagnosis:
Newborn male delivered in the hospital by cesarean section and with Down syndrome (Trisomy 21)
Index:
Newborn
 (infant) (liveborn) (single) Z38.2
born in hospital Z38.00 by cesarean Z38.01
Tabular:
Z38.01 Single liveborn infant, delivered by cesarean
Next, report the Down syndrome.
Index:
Down syndrome
 Q90.0
Tabular:
Q90 Down syndrome
Use additional code(s) to identify any associated physical conditions and degree of intellectual disabilities (F70-
F79).
Q90.9 Down syndrome, unspecified
Trisomy 21 NOS
Codes:
Z38.01, Q90.9, F79 Newborn male delivered by cesarean section in the hospital; Down syndrome
Trisomy 21
 is the name for Down syndrome because most Down
syndrome is due to a cell having two 21st chromosomes instead of
one. When the cells merge, there are three 21st chromosomes, rather
than one from each parent. Some cases are due to 
mosaicism
 in which
some cell lines have normal chromosomes and other cell lines have
the trisomy 21—resulting in one chromosome from each parent and
an additional portion of trisomy 21 from the other parent. There are
two types of mosaicism—cellular and tissue. In 
cellular mosaicism
there is a mixture of various cells of the same type, and in 
tissue
mosaicism
 one set of cells has normal cells and another has trisomy
21. 
Robertsonian translocation
 is a condition in which there are
irregularities in both the 14th and 21st chromosome in that some of
the cells of the 14th chromosome replace some of the cells in the 21st
chromosome, and some of the cells in the 21st chromosome replace
the cells in the 14th chromosome. Some only have a triplication of the
21st chromosome that is referred to as partial trisomy 21.
All of the codes in 
Chapter 17
 report chromosomal abnormalities,
such as Fragile X syndrome (Q99.2), Klinefelter syndrome (Q98.0-
Q98.1, Q98.4), and mosaicism (Q91.1, 
Q91.5, Q92.1, Q93.1, Q96.3,
Q96.4, Q97.2, Q98.7). The physician must document the type of
chromosomal abnormalities to enable the coder to correctly assign a
diagnosis code. If the documentation is not clear as to the abnormality,
query the physician before assigning a code to the abnormality.
EXERCISE 7-2
Congenital Malformations, Deformations
and Chromosomal Abnormalities
Assign I-10 codes for the following:
1 
Congenital absence of the earlobe
Code: ________________
2 
Newborn male delivered in the hospital via vaginal delivery;
undescended bilateral testicles (pediatrician will reevaluate in 6
weeks)
Codes: ________________, ________________
3 
Three-year-old diagnosed with fragile X syndrome
Code: ________________
4 
Newborn transferred to a facility because of congenital dislocation
of right hip (code as the facility transferred to)
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Symptoms, signs, and abnormal
clinical and laboratory findings, not
elsewhere classified
Chapter 18
, Symptoms, Signs, and Abnormal Clinical and Laboratory
Findings, Not Elsewhere Classified (R00-R99), in the Tabular of the I-
10 includes symptoms, signs, abnormal results of investigations, and
other ill-defined conditions. Signs and symptoms codes are assigned
for encounters until there is a definitive diagnosis. A 
sign
 is defined as
objective evidence of disease that can be observed by the physician. A
symptom
 is a subjective observation reported by the patient but not
confirmed objectively by the physician.
You assign the codes from 
Chapter 18
 when:
■
 
no more specific diagnosis can be made after investigation
■
 
signs and symptoms existing at the time of the initial encounter
prove to be transient or a cause cannot be determined
■
 
a patient fails to return and you have only a provisional diagnosis
■
 
a case is referred elsewhere before a definitive diagnosis is made
■
 
a more precise diagnosis is not available for any other reason
■
 
certain symptoms that represent important problems in the medical
care exist and it may be desirable to classify them in addition to the
known cause
The block
s for 
Chapter 18
 are displayed in 
Fig. 7-5
.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.18.
Chapter 18
: Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and
laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (r00-r99)
Chapter 18
 includes symptoms, signs, abnormal results of clinical or
other investigative procedures, and ill-defined conditions regarding
which no diagnosis classifiable elsewhere is recorded. Signs and
symptoms that point to a specific diagnosis have been assigned to a
category in other chapters of the classification.
a. 
Use of symptom codes
Codes that describe symptoms and signs are
acceptable for reporting purposes when a
related definitive diagnosis has not been
established (confirmed) by the provider.
b. 
Use of a symptom code with a definitive diagnosis code
Codes for signs and symptoms may be reported
in addition to a related definitive diagnosis
when the sign or symptom is not routinely
associated with that diagnosis, such as the
various signs and symptoms associated with
complex syndromes. The definitive diagnosis
code should be sequenced before the symptom
code.
Signs or symptoms that are associated routinely
with a disease process should not be assigned
as additional codes, unless otherwise instructed
by the classification.
c. 
Combination codes that include symptoms
ICD-10-CM contains a number of combination
codes that identify both the definitive diagnosis
and common symptoms of that diagnosis.
When using one of these combination codes, an
additional code should not be assigned for the
symptom.
d. 
Repeated falls
Code R29.6, Repeated falls, is for use for
encounters when a patient has recently fallen
and the reason for the fall is being investigated.
Code Z91.81, History of falling, is for use when a
patient has fallen in the past and is at risk for
future falls. When appropriate, both codes
R29.6 and Z91.81 may be assigned together.
e. 
Coma scale
The coma scale codes (R40.2-) can be used in
conjunction with traumatic brain injury codes,
acute cerebrovascular disease or sequelae of
cerebrovascular disease codes. These codes are
primarily for use by trauma registries, but they
may be used in any setting where this
information is collected. 
The coma scale may
also be used to assess the status of the central
nervous system for other non-trauma
conditions, such as monitoring patients in the
intensive care unit regardless of medical
condition.
 The coma scale codes should be
sequenced after the diagnosis code(s).
These codes, one from each subcategory, are
needed to complete the scale. The 7
th
 character
indicates when the scale was recorded. The 7
th
character should match for all three codes.
At a minimum, report the initial score
documented on presentation at your facility.
This may be a score from the emergency
medicine technician (EMT) or in the emergency
department. If desired, a facility may choose to
capture multiple coma scale scores.
Assign code R40.24, Glasgow coma scale, total
score, when only the total score is documented
in the medical record and not the individual
score(s).
f. 
Functional quadriplegia
Functional quadriplegia (code R53.2) is the lack of
ability to use one’s limbs or to ambulate due to
extreme debility. It is not associated with
neurologic deficit or injury, and code R53.2
should not be used for cases of neurologic
quadriplegia. It should only be assigned if
functional quadriplegia is specifically
documented in the medical record.
g. 
SIRS due to Non-Infectious Process
The systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS) can develop as a result of certain non-
infectious disease processes, such as trauma,
malignant neoplasm, or pancreatitis. When
SIRS is documented with a noninfectious
condition, and no subsequent infection is
documented, the code for the underlying
condition, such as an injury, should be
assigned, followed by code R65.10, Systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) of
non-infectious origin without acute organ
dysfunction, or code R65.11, Systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) of
non-infectious origin with acute organ
dysfunction. If an associated acute organ
dysfunction is documented, the appropriate
code(s) for the specific type of organ
dysfunction(s) should be assigned in addition
to code R65.11. If acute organ dysfunction is
documented, but it cannot be determined if the
acute organ dysfunction is associated with SIRS
or due to another condition (e.g., directly due to
the trauma), the provider should be queried.
h. 
Death NOS
Code R99, Ill-defined and unknown cause of
mortality, is only for use in the very limited
circumstance when a patient who has already
died is brought into an emergency department
or other healthcare facility and is pronounced
dead upon arrival. It does not represent the
discharge disposition of death.
i. 
NIHSS Stroke Scale
The NIH stroke scale (NIHSS) codes (R29.7- -)
can be used in conjunction with acute stroke
codes (I63) to identify the patient’s
neurological status and the severity of the
stroke. The stroke scale codes should be
sequenced after the acute stroke diagnosis
code(s).
At a minimum, report the initial score
documented. If desired, a facility may choose
to capture multiple stroke scale scores.
See I.B.14. for information concerning the medical
record documentation that may be used for
assignment of the NIHSS codes.
 
FIGURE 7–5
Blocks in Chapter 18, Symptoms, Signs, and Abnormal
Clinical and Laboratory Findings, Not Elsewhere Classified (R00-R99).
You do not report codes from 
Chapter 18
 when a definitive
diagnosis is available—for example, this diagnostic statement: “Right
lower quadrant abdominal pain due to acute appendicitis.” The code
for right lower quadrant abdominal pain is R10.31, located in 
Chapter
18
. But because the reason for the pain is the acute appendicitis, you
would not include the code for 
the symptom of abdominal pain;
rather you would assign K35.80 for the acute appendicitis—the
definitive diagnosis.
You do not report codes from 
Chapter 18
 when the symptom is
considered to be routinely associated with a disease process—for
example, this diagnostic statement: “Cough and fever with
pneumonia.” Both cough and fever are symptoms of the pneumonia;
therefore, you would not assign codes for either symptom of cough or
fever. The only code you would assign would be J18.9 to report
pneumonia.
A disease reference book comes in handy until you become more
familiar with disease symptoms. If you do not know the symptoms
associated with a disease, consult reference material, ask a colleague,
or query the physician.
One method to find 
abnormal
 findings in the Index is to refer the
main term “Abnormal” and subterm by specific test.
Abnormal Findings
Example
Diagnosis:
Abnormal liver scan
Index:
Abnormal, abnormality, abnormalities,
 scan, liver R93.2
Tabular:
R93 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of other body structures
R93.2 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of liver and biliary tract
Code:
R93.2 Abnormal liver scan
When reporting complications of surgical or medical care, you must
be certain the complications are documented. A surgical complication
is one that takes place as a result of the procedure. Just because a
complication occurs following a procedure does not mean the
complication is a result of the surgery. Do not assume a cause-and-
effect relationship. Rather, clarify any questions with the physician.
The term complication as used in I-10 does not imply that improper
or inadequate care is responsible for the problem. Also, there is no
time limit for the development of a complication. The time the
complication presents will dictate the way in which the complication
is reported. Be sure to use the Index and follow all instructional notes
when locating complication codes. Exclusion notes are extensive in
complication codes and often direct the coder to report the
complication with a code from another category.
EXERCISE 7-3
Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-Defined
Conditions
Assign I-10 codes for the following:
1 
Fussy infant
Code: ________________
2 
Pleuritic-type chest pain on breathing
Code: ________________
3 
Abnormal mammogram
Code: ________________
4 
Nonspecific abnormal findings of cervical Papanicolaou smear
Code: ________________
5 
Elevated blood pressure reading, no diagnosis of HTN
Code: ________________
6 
Miss Halliday is an 80-year-old woman who presents to the
emergency department with a history of abdominal pain, fever, and
burning with urination. Urine culture is obtained, and Miss
Halliday is admitted for work-up to rule out urosepsis. Urosepsis
was ruled out.
Codes: ________________, ________________,
________________
7 
Mr. Johnson is admitted to the hospital with chest and epigastric
pain. He is evaluated by the emergency department physician with
a diagnosis of rule out myocardial infarction. Mr. Johnson is then
transferred to a larger facility for further work-up.
Codes: ________________ and ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes
Injury, poisoning, and certain other consequences of external causes
are reported with codes in the S00-T88 range.
The blocks of 
Chapter 19
 are as illustrated in 
Fig. 7-6
.
 
FIGURE 7–6
Blocks in Chapter 19, Injury, Poisoning, and Certain
Other Consequences of External Causes (S00-T88).
Code extensions
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.19.
Chapter 19
: Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes (s00-t88)
a. 
Application of 7
th
 Characters in
 
Chapter 19
Most categories in 
chapter 19
 have a 7
th
 character
requirement for each applicable code. Most
categories in this chapter have three 7
th
character values (with the exception of
fractures): A, initial encounter, D, subsequent
encounter and S, sequela. Categories for
traumatic fractures have additional 7
th
 character
values. While the patient may be seen by a new
or different provider over the course of
treatment for an injury, assignment of the 7
th
character is based on whether the patient is
undergoing active treatment and not whether
the provider is seeing the patient for the first
time.
For complication codes, active treatment refers to
treatment for the condition described by the
code, even though it may be related to an
earlier precipitating problem. For example,
code T84.50XA, Infection and inflammatory
reaction due to unspecified internal joint
prosthesis, initial encounter, is used when
active treatment is provided for the infection,
even though the condition relates to the
prosthetic device, implant, or graft that was
placed at a previous encounter.
7
th
 character “A”, initial encounter is used 
for
each encounter where
 the patient is receiving
active treatment for the condition.
7
th
 character “D” subsequent encounter is used for
encounters after the patient has 
completed
active treatment of the condition and is
receiving routine care for the condition during
the healing or recovery phase.
The aftercare Z codes should not be used for
aftercare for conditions such as injuries or
poisonings, where 7
th
 characters are provided to
identify subsequent care. For example, for
aftercare of an injury, assign the acute injury
code with the 7
th
 character “D” (subsequent
encounter).
7
th
 character “S”, sequela, is for use for
complications or conditions that arise as a
direct result of a condition, such as scar
formation after a burn. The scars are sequelae of
the burn. When using 7
th
 character “S”, it is
necessary to use both the injury code that
precipitated the sequela and the code for the
sequela itself. The “S” is added only to the
injury code, not the sequela code. The 7
th
character “S” identifies the injury responsible
for the sequela. The specific type of sequela (e.g.
scar) is sequenced first, followed by the injury
code.
When reporting an S00-T88 code, you would usually also report a
secondary code or codes from 
Chapter 20
, External Causes of
Morbidity, to indicate the cause of the injury, such as a motor vehicle
accident or fall from a ladder. However, there are T codes that include
the external cause as part of the code description.
The S00-S99 codes are injuries to specific body areas (head, thorax,
hip, etc.) and T07 and T14 are for injuries to unspecified body regions.
The remaining T codes report injuries, such as burns, frostbite,
poisoning, toxic effects, as well as complications of trauma and
surgical/medical care NEC. Most of these codes have 7th character
categories to indicate the encounter (initial [A] or subsequent [D] and
sequela [S]). The initial encounter is when the patient is receiving
active treatment, such as surgical treatment or an office evaluation.
The subsequent encounter is for the patient who has received the
active treatment and is now receiving routine care during the recovery
or healing phase. The sequela is a residual complication or condition
that develops as a result of an injury, such as a scar from a burn.
Coding injuries
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.19.
Chapter 19
: Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes (s00-t88)
b. 
Coding of Injuries
When coding injuries, assign separate codes for
each injury unless a combination code is
provided, in which case the combination code is
assigned. Code T07, Unspecified multiple
injuries should not be assigned in the inpatient
setting unless information for a more specific
code is not available. Traumatic injury codes
(S00-T14.9) are not to be used for normal,
healing surgical wounds or to identify
complications of surgical wounds.
The code for the most serious injury, as
determined by the provider and the focus of
treatment, is sequenced first.
1) 
Superficial injuries
Superficial injuries such as abrasions or
contusions are not coded when associated with
more severe injuries of the same site.
2) 
Primary injury with damage to nerves/blood
vessels
When a primary injury results in minor damage
to peripheral nerves or blood vessels, the
primary injury is sequenced first with
additional code(s) for injuries to nerves and
spinal cord (such as category S04), and/or injury
to blood vessels (such as category S15). When
the primary injury is to the blood vessels or
nerves, that injury should be sequenced first.
Codes in the S00-T14.9 range are not assigned to report
complications of surgical wounds or the normal healing of surgical
wounds. For example, if the complication was of burst stitches of an
external surgical wound for which there was no specific code, you
would report T81.31XA, Disruption of external operation wound, not
elsewhere classified; but if the disruption was of an episiotomy
wound, you would report the more specific code O90.1, Disruption of
perineal obstetric wound.
If the patient has multiple injuries, the physician is to indicate the
most serious condition, and it is that condition that is the first-listed
diagnosis. Report a code for each injury documented in the medical
record. There are rules that indicate when one injury is present, not to
report some other types of injuries of the same area. For example, do
not report abrasions of an area when there is a more serious injury of
the same area, such as abrasions of the knee with fracture of the knee.
You would report the fracture but not the abrasions.
When the damage is to the nerve or blood vessel, report the primary
injury first and use an additional code if nerve/vessel damage is minor
—for example, a puncture wound of the knee in which there was
nerve injury. Report the puncture wound as the first-listed diagnosis
and additional code(s) for the nerve damage. If, however, the primary
injury is to a nerve or blood vessel, report that injury first.
A fracture not indicated as closed or open should be classified as
closed
. If a fracture is not indicated to be displaced or not displaced,
report the fracture as displaced. If you have any doubt, query the
physician as to the nature of the fracture.
If there is a dislocation and fracture of the same bone, report only
the fracture because the fracture is more severe than dislocation.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.19.
Chapter 19
: Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes (s00-t88)
c. 
Coding of Traumatic Fractures
The principles of multiple coding of injuries
should be followed in coding fractures.
Fractures of specified sites are coded
individually by site in accordance with both the
provisions within categories S02, S12, S22, S32,
S42, S49, S52, S59, S62, S72, S79, S82, S89, S92
and the level of detail furnished by medical
record content.
A fracture not indicated as open or closed should
be coded to closed. A fracture not indicated
whether displaced or not displaced should be
coded to displaced.
More specific guidelines are as follows:
1) 
Initial vs. Subsequent Encounter for Fractures
Traumatic fractures are coded using the
appropriate 7
th
 character for initial encounter
(A, B, C) 
for each encounter where
 the patient
is receiving active treatment for the fracture.
The appropriate 7
th
 character for initial
encounter should also be assigned for a patient
who delayed seeking treatment for the fracture
or nonunion.
Fractures are coded using the appropriate 7
th
character for subsequent care for encounters
after the patient has completed active treatment
of the fracture and is receiving routine care for
the fracture during the healing or recovery
phase.
Care for complications of surgical treatment for
fracture repairs during the healing or recovery
phase should be coded with the appropriate
complication codes.
Care of complications of fractures, such as
malunion and nonunion, should be reported
with the appropriate 7
th
 character for
subsequent care with nonunion (K, M, N,) or
subsequent care with malunion (P, Q, R).
Malunion/nonunion: The appropriate 7
th
 character
for initial encounter should also be assigned for
a patient who delayed seeking treatment for the
fracture or nonunion.
The open fracture designations in the
assignment of the 7th character for fractures of
the forearm, femur and lower leg, including
ankle are based on the Gustilo open fracture
classification. When the Gustilo classification
type is not specified for an open fracture, the
7th character for open fracture type I or II
should be assigned (B, E, H, M, Q).
A code from category M80, not a traumatic
fracture code, should be used for any patient
with known osteoporosis who suffers a
fracture, even if the patient had a minor fall or
trauma, if that fall or trauma would not usually
break a normal, healthy bone.
See Section I.C.13. Osteoporosis.
The aftercare Z codes should not be used for
aftercare for traumatic fractures. For aftercare of
a traumatic fracture, assign the acute fracture
code with the appropriate 7
th
 character.
2) 
Multiple fractures sequencing
Multiple fractures are sequenced in accordance
with the severity of the fracture.
Dislocation and Fracture
Example
Diagnosis:
Traumatic fracture of the right hip with dislocation, initial encounter
Index:
Dislocation,
 with fracture—
see
 Fracture
The “
see
 Fracture” informs the coder that the dislocation is included with the fracture code.
Index:
Fracture,
 traumatic, femur, upper end S72.00
Tabular:
S72.00 Fracture of unspecified part of neck of femur
Fracture of hip NOS
Fracture of neck of femur NOS
S72.001 
Fracture of unspecified part of neck of right femur
Code:
S72.001A Fractured right hip with dislocation
Coding fractures
The S72 category has the 7th characters that are illustrated in 
Fig. 7-7
.
 
FIGURE 7–7
The 7th characters of category S72.
In the Index of the I-10, there is a main entry for “Fracture,
pathologic” and “Fracture, traumatic” with subterms by body location
(i.e., ankle, clavicle, etc.), due to (i.e., neoplastic disease, specific
disease, etc.). If, for example, you reference “Fracture, pathologic,
ankle” you are directed to M84.47-, but if you reference “Fracture,
traumatic, ankle” you are directed to S82.899. Use caution when
locating fracture terms in the Index to ensure you are at the correct
subterm. A fracture that is 
pathologic
 is one that occurs due to disease
or weakening of an area, such as osteoporosis, and with pressure that
would not ordinarily fracture a bone, such as a bone weakened by
osteoporosis fractures. Sometimes, the fractures occur without even a
pressure blow of any type; the osteoporotic bone just spontaneously
fractures.
Pathological Fracture
Example
Diagnosis:
Pathological fracture of the right humerus, due to osteoporosis
Index:
Osteoporosis with current pathological fracture - M80.00
specified type NEC- M81.8 with pathological fracture- M80.80
humerus - M80.82-
Tabular:
M80 Osteoporosis with current pathological fracture
M80.8 Other osteoporosis with current pathological fracture
M80.82 Other osteoporosis with current pathological fracture, humerus
M80.821 - right humerus
M80.821A Other osteoporosis with current pathological fracture, right humerus
If there are multiple fractures, sequence the fractures in order of
severity with the most severe listed first. Query the physician when
the severity is not documented.
When there is an aftercare encounter for a fracture (such as cast
removal, removal of internal fixation devices), do not assign a Z code
(encounters with health care services and health status codes); rather,
assign the 7th character of “D” to the fracture code to indicate a
subsequent encounter with routine healing.
Coding burns and corrosions
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.19.
Chapter 19
: Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes (s00-t88)
d. 
Coding of Burns and Corrosions
The ICD-10-CM makes a distinction between
burns and corrosions. The burn codes are for
thermal burns, except sunburns, that come from
a heat source, such as a fire or hot appliance.
The burn codes are also for burns resulting
from electricity and radiation. Corrosions are
burns due to chemicals. The guidelines are the
same for burns and corrosions.
Current burns (T20-T25) are classified by depth,
extent and by agent (X code). Burns are
classified by depth as first degree (erythema),
second degree (blistering), and third degree
(full-thickness involvement). Burns of the eye
and internal organs (T26-T28) are classified by
site, but not by degree.
1) 
Sequencing of burn and related condition
codes
Sequence first the code that reflects the highest
degree of burn when more than one burn is
present.
a. 
When the reason for the admission or
encounter is for treatment of external multiple
burns, sequence first the code that reflects the
burn of the highest degree.
b. 
When a patient has both internal and external
burns, the circumstances of admission govern
the selection of the principal diagnosis or first-
listed diagnosis.
c. 
When a patient is admitted for burn injuries
and other related conditions such as smoke
inhalation and/or respiratory failure, the
circumstances of admission govern the
selection of the principal or first-listed
diagnosis.
2) 
Burns of the same local site
Classify burns of the same local site (three-
character category level, T20-T28) but of
different degrees to the subcategory identifying
the highest degree recorded in the diagnosis.
3) 
Non-healing burns
Non-healing burns are coded as acute burns.
Necrosis of burned skin should be coded as a non-
healed burn.
4) 
Infected Burn
For any documented infected burn site, use an
additional code for the infection.
5) 
Assign separate codes for each burn site
When coding burns, assign separate codes for
each burn site. Category T30, Burn and
corrosion, body region unspecified is extremely
vague and should rarely be used.
6) 
Burns and Corrosions Classified According to
Extent of Body Surface Involved
Assign codes from category T31, Burns classified
according to extent of body surface involved, or
T32, Corrosions classified according to extent of
body surface involved, when the site of the
burn is not specified or when there is a need for
additional data. It is advisable to use category
T31 as additional coding when needed to
provide data for evaluating burn mortality,
such as that needed by burn units. It is also
advisable to use category T31 as an additional
code for reporting purposes when there is
mention of a third-degree burn involving 20
percent or more of the body surface.
Categories T31 and T32 are based on the classic
“rule of nines” in estimating body surface
involved: head and neck are assigned nine
percent, each arm nine percent, each leg 18
percent, the anterior trunk 18 percent, posterior
trunk 18 percent, and genitalia one percent.
Providers may change these percentage
assignments where necessary to accommodate
infants and children who have proportionately
larger heads than adults, and patients who have
large buttocks, thighs, or abdomen that involve
burns.
7) 
Encounters for treatment of sequela of burns
Encounters for the treatment of the late effects of
burns or corrosions (i.e., scars or joint
contractures) should be coded with a burn or
corrosion code with the 7
th
 character “S” for
sequela.
8) 
Sequelae with a late effect code and current
burn
When appropriate, both a code for a current burn
or corrosion with 7
th
 character extension “A” or
“D” and a burn or corrosion code with 7
th
character “S” may be assigned on the same
record (when both a current burn and sequelae
of an old burn exist). Burns and corrosions do
not heal at the same rate and a current healing
wound may still exist with sequela of a healed
burn or corrosion.
See Section I.B.10 Sequela (Late Effects)
9) 
Use of an external cause code with burns and
corrosions
An external cause code should be used with burns
and corrosions to identify the source and intent
of the burn, as well as the place where it
occurred.
I-10 distinguishes between burns and corrosions. 
Burns
 are those
injuries that result from a heat source, such as a burner on the stove or
hot water—thermal burns. Electrical and radiation burns are also
considered burns. Burns are reported based on degree of burn—first,
second, third; except if the burn is of the eye or internal organ (T26-
T28), then the burn is reported by site. 
Corrosions
 (T20-T25) are a
result of chemical contact and are classified by depth, extent, and
agent.
Specified sites of burns and corrosions of the external body are
reported with T20-T25 codes that are based on degree:
■
 
First (erythema)
■
 
Second (blisters, epidermal loss)
■
 
Third (deep necrosis of underlying tissue or full thickness skin loss)
Sequence the site of the highest degree of burn first. For example, if
you are reporting a third-degree burn of the hand and a second-
degree burn of the chest wall, sequence the code for the third-degree
(the highest degree) hand burn first followed by the second-degree
chest wall burn code.
If there are different degrees of burns at the same site, only assign a
code to the highest degree. For example, if the documentation
indicates there were first- and second-degree burns to the right hand,
only report the second-degree burn to the hand because that is the
highest of severity. There are also codes used in conjunction with the
burn and corrosion codes.
Burns
Example
Diagnosis:
First- and second-degree corrosion, due to hydrochloric acid, of the upper back, initial encounter. Location of
injury was the patient’s private garage attached to his home and the incident was accidental. He was using the acid
to remove rust from an iron lawn chair.
Index:
Corrosion
 (injury) (acid) (caustic) (chemical) (lime) (external) (internal) T30.4
back (lower) T21.44
upper T21.43
first degree T21.53
second degree T21.63
Tabular:
T21.6 Corrosion of second degree of trunk
Code first (T51-T65) to identify chemical and intent
Use additional external cause code to identify place (Y92)
T21.63 Corrosion of second degree of upper back
The 6th character “X” is added to allow for the 7th character “A” that indicates an initial encounter.
Code:
T21.63XA Second-degree corrosion to the back
Note that the diagnosis includes first- and second-degree corrosion
and the code assigned reports only the second-degree corrosion.
Report only the highest degree when corrosion or burns are at the
same site. The instructional note following T21.6 directs the coder to:
• 
Code first (T51-T65) to identify chemical and intent.
• 
In this case, T54.2X1A—this is the first-listed diagnosis, followed by the burn code T21.63XA.
• 
Use additional external cause code to identify place (Y92, Place of occurrence of the external cause).
• 
In this case, Y92.015, Private garage of single-family [private] house. The place of occurrence should be recorded only at the
initial encounter for treatment.
• 
The activity code reports the circumstance of the injury.
• 
In this case, Y93.H9, Other activity involving property and land maintenance, building, and construction, is assigned to
report that the patient was involved in maintenance at the time of the injury.
Codes:
T54.2X1A, T21.63XA, Y92.015, Y93.H9
When reporting a burn, report the source of the heat that caused
the burn first, followed by a code to report the burn, the place the
incident occurred, and the activity being performed at the time of
injury.
EXERCISE 7-4
Burns and Corrosions
Code the burn, extent of the body surface involved, and percentage of
body surface burned using the rule of nines:
1 
A 3-year-old receives third-degree burns of the abdomen, 10%, and
second-degree burns of the thigh, 5%, after pulling a pot of hot
water from stove on herself
Third-degree Code: ________________
Second-degree Code: ________________
Degree and Percentage Code: ________________
X Code: ________________
2 
Infected third-degree burn, left thigh, 4½%, subsequent early
treatment
Third-degree Code: ________________
Infected burn Code: ________________
Extent Code: ________________
3 
First- and second-degree burn, right foot, 2¼%, due to bonfire
flames
Second-degree Code: ________________
Extent Code: ________________
X Code: ________________
4 
Third-degree burn, right hand, 2¼%; excisional debridement
performed by physician; patient seen 10 days ago for initial
treatment
Third-degree Code: ________________
Extent Code: ________________
5 
Second-degree burn, right forearm, 2%; first-degree burn, right
hand, 1%; and third-degree burn, chest wall, 8%, subsequent
treatment
Codes: ________________, ________________,
________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Coding adverse effects, poisoning,
underdosing, and toxic effects
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.19.
Chapter 19
: Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes (s00-t88)
e. 
Adverse Effects, Poisoning, Underdosing and Toxic Effects
Codes in categories T36-T65 are combination
codes that include the substance that was taken,
as well as the intent. No additional external
cause code is required for poisonings, toxic
effects, adverse effects and underdosing codes.
1) 
Do not code directly from the Table of Drugs
Do not code directly from the Table of Drugs and
Chemicals. Always refer back to the Tabular
List.
2) 
Use as many codes as necessary to describe
Use as many codes as necessary to describe
completely all drugs, medicinal or biological
substances.
3) 
If the same code would describe the causative
agent
If the same code would describe the causative
agent for more than one adverse reaction,
poisoning, toxic effect or underdosing, assign
the code only once.
4) 
If two or more drugs, medicinal or biological
substances
If two or more drugs, medicinal or biological
substances are reported, code each individually
unless a combination code is listed in the Table
of Drugs and Chemicals.
5) 
The occurrence of drug toxicity is classified in
ICD-10-CM as follows:
(a) 
Adverse Effect
When coding an adverse effect of a drug that has
been correctly prescribed and properly
administered, assign the appropriate code for
the nature of the adverse effect followed by the
appropriate code for the adverse effect of the
drug (T36-T50). The code for the drug should
have a 5
th
 or 6
th
 character “5” (for example
T36.0X5-) Examples of the nature of an adverse
effect are tachycardia, delirium, gastrointestinal
hemorrhaging, vomiting, hypokalemia,
hepatitis, renal failure, or respiratory failure.
(b) 
Poisoning
When coding a poisoning or reaction to the
improper use of a medication (e.g., overdose,
wrong substance given or taken in error, wrong
route of administration), first assign the
appropriate code from categories T36-T50. The
poisoning codes have an associated intent as
their 5
th
 or 6
th
 character (accidental, intentional
self-harm, assault and undetermined. 
If the
intent of the poisoning is unknown or
unspecified, code the intent as accidental
intent. The undetermined intent is only for
use if the documentation in the record
specifies that the intent cannot be determined.
Use additional code(s) for all manifestations of
poisonings.
If there is also a diagnosis of abuse or dependence
of the substance, the abuse or dependence is
assigned as an additional code.
Examples of poisoning include:
(i) 
Error was made in drug prescription
Errors made in drug prescription or in the
administration of the drug by provider, nurse,
patient, or other person.
(ii) 
Overdose of a drug intentionally taken
If an overdose of a drug was intentionally taken
or administered and resulted in drug toxicity, it
would be coded as a poisoning.
(iii) 
Nonprescribed drug taken with correctly
prescribed and properly administered drug
If a nonprescribed drug or medicinal agent was
taken in combination with a correctly
prescribed and properly administered drug,
any drug toxicity or other reaction resulting
from the interaction of the two drugs would be
classified as a poisoning.
(iv) 
Interaction of drug(s) and alcohol
When a reaction results from the interaction of a
drug(s) and alcohol, this would be classified as
poisoning.
See Section I.C.4. if poisoning is the result of insulin
pump malfunctions.
(c) 
Underdosing
Underdosing refers to taking less of a medication
than is prescribed by a provider or a
manufacturer’s instruction. For underdosing,
assign the code from categories T36-T50 (fifth
or sixth character “6”).
Codes for underdosing should never be assigned
as principal or first-listed codes. If a patient has
a relapse or exacerbation of the medical
condition for which the drug is prescribed
because of the reduction in dose, then the
medical condition itself should be coded.
Noncompliance (Z91.12-, Z91.13-) or complication
of care (Y63.6-Y63.9) codes are to be used with
an underdosing code to indicate intent, if
known.
(d) 
Toxic Effects
When a harmful substance is ingested or comes in
contact with a person, this is classified as a toxic
effect. The toxic effect codes are in categories
T51-T65.
Toxic effect codes have an associated intent:
accidental, intentional self-harm, assault and
undetermined.
The codes in the categories T36-T65 report the external causes of
adverse effects, poisoning, underdosing, and toxic effects as well as
the causative substance; therefore, no additional external cause code is
required.
Poisoning
Example
T36.0X1A reports initial encounter for accidental (
unintentional
)
poisoning by penicillin
T36.0X2A reports initial encounter for 
intentional
 self-harm poisoning
by penicillin
There are often multiple codes required to completely describe the
substances involved. If the causative agent, such as the penicillin, is
responsible for multiple reactions, report the agent only once. If
multiple substances are involved, report each substance separately,
unless there is a combination code to report more than one substance
with one code.
The External Causes index and Table of Drugs and Chemicals is
used to initially locate the terms, subterms, and codes; but as with all
diagnosis coding, you must reference the Tabular before assigning a
code. The Table contains classification of drugs and substances to
identify adverse effects and poisoning.
Adverse effect
 occurs when a substance is taken correctly but the
patient has a negative reaction to the substance.
Adverse Effect
Example
Amoxicillin is prescribed for a patient with a diagnosis of
bronchitis. The patient takes the medicine as prescribed; however, the
medication causes a rash (adverse effect).
Poisoning
 occurs when the medication is incorrectly taken.
Poisoning
Example
Amoxicillin prescribed for a patient with a diagnosis of bronchitis
and rather than one tablet, as prescribed, the patient takes 4 tablets
and nausea results (poisoning).
The poisoning is due to the improper use of a medication and is
assigned a poisoning code from the categories T36-T50.
The Table of Drugs and Chemicals displays the drug name
alphabetically on the left under the heading “
Substance
” (
Fig. 7-8
).
■
 
The code in the first column, “
Poisoning, Accidental
(Unintentional),
” is for the substance involved but is not related to
an adverse effect.
■
 
The second column is “
Poisoning, Intentional, Self-Harm
” when
the external cause is a result of a person intentionally taking the
substance.
■
 
The third column is “
Poisoning, Assault
” when there is intentional
infliction by another person.
■
 
The fourth column is “
Poisoning, Undetermined
” when the intent
is not known.
■
 
The fifth column is “
Adverse Effect
” and was discussed previously.
■
 
The sixth column is “
Underdosing
,” which refers to taking less of
the medication than was prescribed.
 
FIGURE 7–8
Table of Drugs and Chemicals.
The codes in the T36-T50 categories report poisoning resulting in
adverse effect or underdosing. For example, T49.7, as displayed in 
Fig.
7-9
, illustrates the codes are divided based on accidental, intentional,
assault, undetermined, adverse effect, and underdosing. If the
underdosing was due to the patient intentionally taking less of the
medication than prescribed, report a noncompliance code (Z91.12-,
noncompliance, Z91.13-, unintentional).
EXERCISE 7-5
Poisoning/Table of Drugs and Chemicals
Using the I-10 manual, assign poisoning T codes to the following:
1 
Poisoning by the ingestion of ethanol, subsequent encounter,
undetermined cause
T Code: ________________
2 
Accidental poisoning by herbicides, subsequent encounter
T Code: ________________
3 
Accidental overdose due to therapeutically prescribed valium, initial
encounter
T Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
FIGURE 7–9
Poisoning category code T49.7.
Abuse, neglect, and other maltreatment
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.19.
Chapter 19
: Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes (s00-t88)
f. 
Adult and child abuse, neglect and other maltreatment
Sequence first the appropriate code from
categories T74.- (Adult and child abuse, neglect
and other maltreatment, confirmed) or T76.-
(Adult and child abuse, neglect and other
maltreatment, suspected) for abuse, neglect and
other maltreatment, followed by any
accompanying mental health or injury code(s).
If the documentation in the medical record states
abuse or neglect it is coded as confirmed (T74.-).
It is coded as suspected if it is documented as
suspected (T76.-).
For cases of confirmed abuse or neglect an
external cause code from the assault section
(X92-
Y09
) should be added to identify the cause
of any physical injuries. A perpetrator code
(Y07) should be added when the perpetrator of
the abuse is known. For suspected cases of
abuse or neglect, do not report external cause or
perpetrator code.
If a suspected case of abuse, neglect or
mistreatment is ruled out during an encounter
code Z04.71, Encounter for examination and
observation following alleged physical adult
abuse, ruled out, or code Z04.72, Encounter for
examination and observation following alleged
child physical abuse, ruled out, should be used,
not a code from T76.
If a suspected case of alleged rape or sexual abuse
is ruled out during an encounter code Z04.41,
Encounter for examination and observation
following alleged 
adult rape
 or code Z04.42,
Encounter for examination and observation
following alleged 
child
 rape, should be used,
not a code from T76.
See Section I.C.15. Abuse in a pregnant patient.
The codes in the categories T74.-, Adult and child abuse, neglect
and other maltreatment 
confirmed
, or T76.-, Adult and child abuse,
neglect and other maltreatment, 
suspected
, are to be sequenced first
when reporting abuse, neglect, or other maltreatment. You would also
report an external cause code from the X92-Y08 categories. If the
perpetrator is known, report Y07.-. For example, Y07.01, Husband as
perpetrator of maltreatment and neglect.
Only report T74.- when the medical documentation states the abuse,
neglect, or other maltreatment is confirmed. If the documentation
does not state confirmed, report suspected abuse, neglect, or
maltreatment with T76.-.
If the abuse, neglect, or maltreatment is suspected and then is ruled
out during an encounter with the physician, report Z04.71 for an adult
and Z04.72 for a child:
Z04.71
Encounter for examination and observation following alleged adult physical abuse
Suspected adult physical abuse, ruled out
EXCLUDES1
 confirmed case of adult physical abuse (T74.-) 
encounter for examination and observation following alleged adult sexual abuse (Z04.41)
 suspected case of adult physical abuse, not ruled out (T76.-)
Z04.72
Encounter for examination and observation following alleged child physical abuse
Suspected child physical abuse, ruled out
EXCLUDES1
 confirmed case of child physical abuse (T74.-)
 encounter for examination and observation following alleged child sexual abuse (Z04.42)
 suspected case of child physical abuse, not ruled out (T76.-)
Open wounds, lacerations, and punctures
Open wounds, lacerations, and punctures are separate entries within
the Index of the I-10.
Open wounds
 are located under the main term “Wound.”
Open Wound
Example
Diagnosis:
Initial encounter for 
open wound
 of the right knee
Index:
Wound, open
  knee S81.00
Tabular:
S81.00 Unspecified open wound of knee
S81.001 Unspecified open wound, right knee
Codes:
S81.001A, Initial encounter for open wound of the right knee
Lacerations
 are located under the main term “Laceration.”
Laceration
Example
Diagnosis:
Initial encounter for 
laceration
 of the right knee
Index:
Laceration
knee S81.019 right, S81.011
Tabular:
S81 Open wound of knee and lower leg
S81.0 Open wound of knee
S81.01 Laceration without foreign body of knee
S81.011 Laceration without foreign body, right knee
Codes:
S81.011A, Initial encounter for laceration of the right knee
Puncture
Example
Puncture
 is located under the main term “Puncture.”
Diagnosis:
Initial encounter for 
puncture
 of the right knee
Index:
Puncture
knee S81.039 right S81.031
Tabular:
S81 Open wound of knee and lower leg
S81.0 Open wound of knee
S81.03 Puncture wound without foreign body of knee
S81.031 Puncture wound without foreign body, right knee
Codes:
S81.031A, Initial encounter for puncture of the right knee
EXERCISE 7-6
Case Study
History of present illness
The patient is a 68-year-old female, status post motor vehicle accident
3 months ago. The patient had an open fracture that was treated
initially with traction for 6 to 8 weeks. After initial treatment with
traction, the patient was placed in a cast brace. She presents with a
complaint of pain in the left femur and inability to bear weight on her
leg. The patient was referred from an orthopedic surgeon. The past
medical history was significant for no history of myocardial infarction
or renal disease and no asthma. The patient had undergone no
previous procedures with the exception of debridement of the open
fracture. Otherwise the patient’s history was unremarkable. The
patient was taking no medications and had no known allergies. She
underwent a preoperative workup that included a gallium scan.
Physical examination
The heart, lungs, and abdomen were benign. The left knee had a 30-
degree extension lag. There was motion with the knee approximately
30 degrees from horizontal axis to 90 degrees of flexion. The patella
was difficult to palpate, and it was very difficult to tell at the time of
examination whether motion was occurring at the fracture or whether
it was occurring at the knee joint. The vascular examination was
unremarkable.
Radiology data and course in hospital
The x-ray film showed nonunion of the left femur. The gallium scan
obtained preoperatively was negative, and there was no evidence of
infection.
Treatment
On May 14, the patient underwent open reduction and internal
fixation of the left femur fracture with a 90-degree dynamic condylar
screw and side plate. The patient tolerated the procedure well. She
received two units of her own autologous blood at the time of
surgery. Postoperatively she was quite anemic due to acute blood
loss, with hemoglobin of 6 to 7 mg/dl. The patient was asymptomatic
clinically, and her vascular examination was intact. On postoperative
day 2, she had motion in the left knee from 0 to 30 degrees of flexion.
She was placed in continuous passive motion and was up with
physical therapy but non-weight-bearing on the left leg. Physical
therapy was tolerated well. The hospital course was benign. The
wound was clean and dry, and the neurovascular examination was
unchanged. The x-ray films obtained before discharge showed
maintenance of alignment of the left femur. The patient’s staples were
removed on postoperative day 7. She was placed in a cast brace and
was discharged home after being independent in physical therapy.
Final diagnosis
Nonunion of the left femur
Procedure
Open reduction and internal fixation of the left femur with 90-degree
screw and site plate
1 
Codes: ________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Complications
When a patient is admitted for a complication that resulted from
medical care or a surgical procedure, the complication is the first-
listed.
ICD-10 OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
SECTION I.C.19.
Chapter 19
: Injury, poisoning, and certain other
consequences of external causes (s00-t88)
g. 
Complications of care
1) 
General guidelines for complications of care
(a) 
Documentation of complications of care
See Section I.B.16. for information on documentation
of complications of care.
2) 
Pain due to medical devices
Pain associated with devices, implants or grafts
left in a surgical site (for example painful hip
prosthesis) is assigned to the appropriate
code(s) found in 
Chapter 19
, Injury, poisoning,
and certain other consequences of external
causes. Specific codes for pain due to medical
devices are found in the T code section of the
ICD-10-CM. Use additional code(s) from
category G89 to identify acute or chronic pain
due to presence of the device, implant or graft
(G89.18 or G89.28).
3) 
Transplant complications
(a) 
Transplant complications other than kidney
Codes under category T86, Complications of
transplanted organs and tissues, are for use for
both complications and rejection of
transplanted organs. A transplant complication
code is only assigned if the complication affects
the function of the transplanted organ. Two
codes are required to fully describe a transplant
complication: the appropriate code from
category T86 and a secondary code that
identifies the complication.
Pre-existing conditions or conditions that develop
after the transplant are not coded as
complications unless they affect the function of
the transplanted organs.
See I.C.21. for transplant organ removal status
See I.C.2. for malignant neoplasm associated with
transplanted organ.
(b) 
Kidney transplant complications
Patients who have undergone kidney transplant
may still have some form of chronic kidney
disease (CKD) because the kidney transplant
may not fully restore kidney function. Code
T86.1- should be assigned for documented
complications of a kidney transplant, such as
transplant failure or rejection or other
transplant complication. Code T86.1- should
not be assigned for post kidney transplant
patients who have chronic kidney (CKD) unless
a transplant complication such as transplant
failure or rejection is documented. If the
documentation is unclear as to whether the
patient has a complication of the transplant,
query the provider.
Conditions that affect the function of the
transplanted kidney, other than CKD, should
be assigned a code from subcategory T86.1,
Complications of transplanted organ, Kidney,
and a secondary code that identifies the
complication.
For patients with CKD following a kidney
transplant, but who do not have a complication
such as failure or rejection, 
see section I.C.14.
Chronic kidney disease and kidney transplant status
.
4) 
Complication codes that include the external
cause
As with certain other T codes, some of the
complications of care codes have the external
cause included in the code. The code includes
the nature of the complication as well as the
type of procedure that caused the complication.
No external cause code indicating the type of
procedure is necessary for these codes.
5) 
Complications of care codes within the body
system chapters
Intraoperative and postprocedural complication
codes are found within the body system
chapters with codes specific to the organs and
structures of that body system. These codes
should be sequenced first, followed by a code(s)
for the specific complication, if applicable.
Complications of care must be documented in the medical record by
the physician. The medical record must also document the
relationship between a procedure and a complication. If the
correlation is not documented, the condition is not a complication.
You cannot assume there is a correlation as only the provider can
indicate that the complication is due to the surgical procedure.
Medical device, graft, or implant. 
If there is pain due to an implanted medical device, graft, or implant
and the physician has documented the correlation in the patient’s
medical record, report a T code for the external cause. If there is pain
due to the presence of the implant, report a G code (G89.18 or G89.28).
Transplant. 
If a transplanted organ is rejected or there are complications due to
the transplanted organ, and the function of the transplanted organ is
affected, report a code from category T86. A code must also be
reported for the complication that resulted.
EXERCISE 7-7
Complications
In the Index, you will find complications of medical and surgical
procedures under the main term “Complications.”
Code the following complications:
1 
Initial encounter for infected breast implants
Code: ________________
2 
Bone marrow graft, rejection
Code: ________________
3 
Subsequent encounter for postprocedural stitch abscess
Codes: ________________, ________________
4 
Cardiac pacemaker, (device) mechanical complication, subsequent
encounter
Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
From the Trenches
“Change is the only constant for a medical coder, so it is extremely
important to continually pursue education and review payer guidelines and
updates.”
PATRICIA
 
STOP
For I-10
 
Chapter 20
, see pages 61-65.
 
STOP
For I-10
 
Chapter 21
, see pages 58-74.
CHAPTER REVIEW
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 7, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 Any condition occurring during pregnancy is considered a(n)
_______________ unless the provider specifically states not affected
by the pregnancy.
2 The perinatal period starts before birth through how many days
after birth? _________
3 If a congenital malformation has been corrected, what type of code
should be reported? ____________________________
4 A “sign” is defined as objective evidence of a disease observed by
the provider. What is the term for a subjective observation?
_______________________________________________________________________________________
5 What 7
th
 character is applied for a patient receiving active treatment
for an injury? _________
Chapter 7, part I, theory
Circle the correct answer in each of the following:
1 Codes from Chapter _________ report congenital malformation,
deformations, and chromosomal abnormalities.
a 16
b 17
c 18
d19
2 It is common to use a fifth character of 0 when coding complications
related to pregnancy.
True  False
3 A pathologic fracture occurs in a bone that is weakened by disease.
True  False
4 The perinatal period extends for 6 weeks following birth.
True  False
5 Generally you do not assign a code from 
Chapter 18
 if a definitive
diagnosis is documented.
True  False
6 When an accident occurs, an External Cause code should be the first-
listed diagnosis.
True  False
7 If a fracture and dislocation are present at the same site, assign only
the fracture code.
True  False
8 An infected laceration should be coded as a complicated wound.
True  False
9 A poisoning occurs when a drug has been correctly prescribed and
properly administered and the patient develops a reaction.
True  False
10 When coding a poisoning, the poisoning code is sequenced before
any manifestation code.
True  False
Chapter 7, part II, practical
Using an I-10 manual, answer the following questions:
11 Initial encounter for infected breast implants
Code: ____________
12 Accidental poisoning by herbicides, subsequent encounter
T Code: ____________
13 Uterine fibroids complicating pregnancy, first trimester
Codes: ____________, ____________
14 Dehiscence cesarean wound. Patient delivered 1 week ago at
another facility.
Code: ____________
15 Term birth, 2268 grams, delivered by cesarean section, with fetal
intrauterine growth retardation; infant’s chart
Codes: ____________, ____________
16 Third-degree burn, right hand, 2¼%; excisional debridement
performed by physician; patient seen 10 days ago for initial
treatment
Codes: ____________ (third degree), ___________
(extent)
17 Elevated blood pressure reading, no diagnosis of HTN
Code: ____________
18 Three-year-old diagnosed with fragile X syndrome
Code: ____________
19 False labor of 38-week pregnancy, undelivered
Code: ____________
20 Mrs. Smith is at 32 weeks’ gestation and is admitted with severe
bleeding with abdominal cramping. An emergency ultrasound is
done and fetal monitors are applied. She is diagnosed with total
placenta previa with indications of fetal distress. An emergency
cesarean section is done, with delivery of a viable male infant.
Codes: ____________, ____________,
____________, ____________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
UNIT 3
CPT and HCPCS
OUTLINE
8.  Introduction to CPT
9.  Introduction to the level II national codes
(HCPCS)
10.  Modifiers
11.  Evaluation and management (E/M) services
12.  Anesthesia
13.  Surgery guidelines and general surgery
14.  Integumentary system
15.  Musculoskeletal system
16.  Respiratory system
17.  Cardiovascular system
18.  Hemic, lymphatic, mediastinum, and
diaphragm
19.  Digestive system
20.  Urinary and male genital systems
21.  Reproductive, intersex surgery, female
genital system, and maternity care and delivery
22.  Endocrine and nervous systems
23.  Eye, ocular adnexa, auditory, and operating
microscope
24.  Radiology
25.  Pathology/laboratory
26.  Medicine
CHAPTER 8
Introduction to CPT
 
“Teamwork is an essential requirement in our profession. We learn
from each other . . . then pass the knowledge on. It is an unbroken
cycle.”
Nancy Maguire, ACS, CRT, PCS, FCS, HCS-D, APC, AFC
Physician Consultant for Auditing and Education
 
Palm Bay, Florida
CHAPTER TOPICS
The Purpose of the CPT Manual
Updating the CPT Manual
CPT Manual Format
Starting with the Index
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Identify the uses of the CPT manual.
2 
Name the developers of the CPT manual.
3 
Know the importance of using the current-year CPT manual.
4 
Identify placement of CPT codes on the CMS-1500 insurance form.
5 
Recognize the symbols used in the CPT manual.
6 
Identify the content of the CPT appendices.
7 
List the major sections found in the CPT manual.
8 
Interpret the information contained in the section Guidelines and
notes.
9 
Describe the CPT code format.
10 
Append modifiers.
11 
Describe what is meant by unlisted procedures/services.
12 
State the purposes of a special report.
13 
Review Category II and III CPT codes.
14 
Locate the terms in the CPT index.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Some of the CPT code descriptions for physician services include
physician extender services. Physician extenders, such as nurse
practitioners, physician assistants, and nurse anesthetists, etc.,
provide medical services typically performed by a physician. Within
this educational material the term “physician” may include “and
other qualified health care professionals” depending on the code.
Refer to the official CPT® code descriptions and guidelines to
determine codes that are appropriate to report services provided by
non-physician practitioners.
The purpose of the CPT manual
Current Procedural Terminology
 (CPT), also known as CPT-4, is a
coding system developed by the American Medical Association
(AMA) to convert widely accepted, uniform descriptions of medical,
surgical, and diagnostic services rendered by health care providers
into five-digit numeric codes. The use of the CPT codes enables health
care providers to communicate both effectively and efficiently with
third-party payers (i.e., commercial insurance companies, Medicare,
Medicaid) about the procedures and services provided to the patient.
For example, on an insurance form you can report a service by
entering 21182 rather than “Reconstruction of orbital walls, rims,
forehead, nasoethmoid complex following intra- and extracranial
excision of benign tumor of the cranial bone (e.g., fibrous dysplasia)
with multiple autografts (includes obtaining grafts); total area of bone
grafting less than 40 sq cm.” By using 21182, you are able to
communicate not only quickly but also exactly about a very detailed
service.
The majority of CPT codes are referred to as Category I codes and
have been approved by the Editorial Panel of the AMA. Category II
codes are optional performance measures (e.g., 3014F, screening
mammography). Category III codes are temporary codes that identify
emerging technologies, services, and procedures (e.g., 0163T, total disc
arthroplasty).
Health care providers are reimbursed for the procedures and
services rendered based on the codes submitted on a claim form. For
an example of placement of the CPT codes on a claim form, refer to
the arrow on 
Fig. 8-1
 (24D).
FIGURE 8–1
The CMS-1500 Health Insurance Claim Form.
Reporting the correct code is essential because incorrect coding can
result in a provider being reimbursed incorrectly or in some cases
being penalized by the government for submitting inappropriate
claims. The CPT coding system is used by clinics, outpatient hospital
departments, ambulatory surgery centers, and third-party payers to
describe health care services. Although there are differences in the
rules governing coding in various health care settings, CPT codes
offer increased compatibility and comparability of data among users
and providers, allowing for comparative analysis, research, and
reimbursement.
The CPT coding system was first developed and published by the
AMA in 1966 as a method of reporting medical and surgical
procedures and services using standard terminology. Three editions
of 
Current Procedural Terminology
 were published in the 1970s, and
updates and revisions reflected changes in the technology and
practices of health care. Use of the CPT manual was increased in 1983
when the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS),
formerly the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA),
incorporated CPT codes into the Healthcare Common Procedural
Coding System (HCPCS) to provide a uniform system of reporting
services, procedures, and supplies. CPT codes are Level I codes and,
for the most part, define professional services. Level II National Codes
(HCPCS) are alphanumeric codes that are used by providers to report
services, supplies, and equipment provided to Medicare and Medicaid
patients for which no CPT codes exist.
HCPCS codes may be required even if a CPT Level I is available.
Some third-party payers follow Medicare and Medicaid guidelines
and may also require HCPCS Level II codes be assigned (e.g., G
codes), so HCPCS may be required on non-Medicare and Medicaid
patients. Certain HCPCS Level II codes are required by all payers,
such as the drug codes, J codes.
Updating the CPT manual
Because the practice of medicine is ever changing, the CPT manual is
ever changing. It is updated annually to reflect technologic advances
and editorial revisions. It is very important to use the most current
CPT manual available so as to provide quality data and ensure
appropriate reimbursement. Many revisions to the CPT were
necessary to address requirements of the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). HIPAA requires the
Secretary of Health and Human Services to adopt national uniform
standards for the electronic transmission of financial and
administrative health information. These standards include a wide
variety of health care information. One item that HIPAA requires is a
common, concise coding system with clear, expandable definitions.
The AMA is meeting this requirement by continuing to make the code
definitions more precise.
 
From the Trenches
“Beginners think that if you have the coding books (CPT, ICD-10-CM)
you’re good to go. I tell them there is a story and history behind each
code.
 
.
 
.
 
. They must investigate codes, modifiers, HCPCS codes, and more
before a final decision can be made. It is never boring!”
NANCY
Updated editions of the CPT manual are available for purchase in
November for use beginning the following January 1.
 The American Medical
Association (AMA) has a website located at 
www.ama-assn.org
.
EXERCISE 8-1
The Purpose of the CPT Manual
Complete the following:
1 
The CPT manual was developed by the
________________________________________________________.
2 
CPT stands for
__________________________________________________________.
3 
Providers of health care are paid based on the codes submitted for
___________________ or procedures provided to the patient.
4 
The first CPT was published in this year: __________________
5 
In which year were CPT codes incorporated as Level I codes into the
Healthcare Procedure Coding System (HCPCS)?
_____________________
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
CPT manual format
The symbols used in the CPT manual are noted on the bottom of each
page in the manual along with a short description of the symbol.
In the CPT manual, 
new
 codes are identified by the bullet (•)
symbol that is placed in front of the code. Note the location of this
symbol in 
Fig. 8-2
.
FIGURE 8–2
New CPT code symbol.
Important symbols and appendices
A triangle (
▴
) placed in front of a code indicates that the description
for the code has been 
changed
 or modified since the previous edition.
Changes may be additions, deletions, or revisions in code descriptions
(
Fig. 8-3
).
FIGURE 8–3
Changed CPT code symbol.
When the text has changed, a right and a left triangle (
▶
 
◂
) indicate
the beginning and end of the text changes, as illustrated in 
Fig. 8-4
.
 
QUICK CHECK 8-1
1. 
Symbols with definitions are located at the bottom of the page in the
CPT manual.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
FIGURE 8–4
Changed CPT text symbols.
Appendix A
 lists all modifiers that are used to alter or modify
codes. Modifiers will be discussed in detail later in the chapter and in
greater detail in 
Chapter 10
.
Appendix B
 of the CPT manual contains a complete list of the
additions to, deletions from, and revisions of the CPT manual. When a
code is listed in 
Appendix B
, the type of change is also listed (
Fig. 8-5
).
FIGURE 8–5
CPT manual Appendix B, showing types of changes.
Appendix C
 of the CPT manual contains clinical examples of many
of the Evaluation and Management (E/M) codes (
Fig. 8-6
).
FIGURE 8–6
Appendix C of the CPT manual contains clinical
examples in the use of E/M codes.
The examples in 
Appendix C
 are meant to offer a broad idea of the
type of presenting problem that each code could represent. But a word
of caution: Only the patient’s record and the services rendered by the
physician to a patient determine the level of service provided.
Appendix C
 is not meant to be an exhaustive list of E/M services.
Appendix D
 in the CPT manual lists all add-on codes. The plus
symbol (+) placed in front of a code indicates an 
add-on code
 (
Fig. 8-
7
).
FIGURE 8–7
Add-on CPT code symbol.
Add-on codes are never used alone; rather, they are reported with
another primary procedure or service code. For example, code 11000
describes a debridement (removal of contaminated tissue) of up to
10% of the body surface. Add-on code 11001 is reported for each
additional 10% of the body surface debrided or part thereof. Code
11001 cannot be reported unless code 11000 is reported first. Also
notice in 
Fig. 8-7
 that there is a note in parentheses that indicates that
code 11001 can be used only in conjunction with code 11000.
Appendix E
 in the CPT manual contains the complete list of
modifier -51 exempt codes. Modifier -51 indicates that more than one
(multiple) procedure was performed. The circle with a line through it (
) identifies a 
modifier -51 exempt
 code (
Fig. 8-8
). Modifier -51 is
discussed later in greater detail in 
Chapter 10
.
FIGURE 8–8
Modifier -51 exempt CPT code symbol.
Appendix F
 of the CPT manual contains the summary of CPT codes
that are Modifier -63 exempt. Modifier -63 identifies procedures that
are performed on infants who weigh less than 
4 kg or 8.8 pounds and
represents a significant increase in the physician’s work and
complexity of service/procedure. Services/Procedures submitted with
modifier -63 may be reviewed for an increase in reimbursement.
Appendix G
 used to provide a summary of Moderate (Conscious)
Sedation codes identified with a bullseye (
⨀
), but was deleted for
2017. Since the bullseye symbol has been removed from all CPT codes,
refer to codes 99151-99157 to report moderate sedation.
Appendix H
 is the Alphabetic Index of Performance Measures by
Clinical Condition or Topic and lists the Category II codes. Category II
codes are optional tracking codes that are used to identify
performance measures of clinical components that may be typically
included in evaluation and management services. The codes make it
easier to collect data about certain services or test results that
contribute to the health and quality of care of the patient. You learn
more about Category II codes later in this chapter. As of 2010, the
Appendix H was removed from the CPT manual and can be accessed
only on the AMA website at 
www.ama-assn.org
.
Appendix I
 used to list the Genetic Testing Code Modifiers but was
deleted for 2013.
Appendix J
 is the Electrodiagnostic Medicine Listing of Sensory,
Motor and Mixed Nerves that identify the sensory, motor, and mixed
nerves with the corresponding conduction study code. Codes are used
to report motor and sensory nerve conduction studies. Appendix J
identifies the nerves in each of the nerve groups. Sensory and motor
nerves are part of the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and run from
the stimulus receptors to the central nervous system (CNS). A table in
Appendix J lists the “reasonable maximum number of studies
performed per diagnostic category necessary for a physician to arrive
at a diagnosis in 90% of the patients with that final diagnosis.” The
recommended number of studies for each indication (condition) is
identified. For example, if the indication was myopathy, it is
recommended that the physician perform two needle
electromyographies (EMGs), two motor nerve conduction studies
(NCS), two sensory NCS, and two neuromuscular junction testings.
Appendix K
, Product Pending FDA Approval, contains the
lightning bolt symbol (
 
) that identifies codes that are being
tracked by the AMA to monitor Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
status for approval of a drug. The Internet site 
www.ama-assn.org
provides updates to the list of FDA pending approval codes.
Appendix L
, Vascular Families, is a helpful listing of the orders of
the vascular families. Listed are the first order, second order, third
order branches, and beyond third order branches. The assumption is
made that the starting point is the aorta. If the vessel is accessed at
some other location, the branches, of course, would not be correct.
Appendix M
, Deleted CPT Codes, lists the current-year code to
replace a deleted code.
Appendix N,
 Summary of Resequenced CPT codes. In 2010, the
American Medical Association introduced 
resequencing
. Historically,
the codes within a CPT section have been in numeric order, but that is
no longer the case. The pound symbol (#) appears before the
resequenced codes (see 
Fig. 8-9
). An example of this resequencing is in
the 51725-51798 range where the code and code description for 51797
follow 51729. Code 51797 also appears in correct numeric order, but
next to the code a note states “Code is out of numerical sequence. See
51725-51798.” See Appendix N of the CPT for a complete list of the
resequenced codes.
FIGURE 8–9
Resequenced CPT code symbol.
Appendix O,
 Multianalyte Assays with Algorithmic Analyses is a
listing of codes for advanced diagnostics, such as ovarian oncology
code 81500, which assays for two proteins (CA-125 and HE4) for a risk
factor.
EXERCISE 8-2
Symbols
Match the following code symbols with the correct definition:
1 
▲
 _____
a. 
beginning and end of text changes
2 
▶
 
◂
 _____
b. 
modifier -51 exempt
3 
● _____
c. 
revised procedure description
4 
 
_____
d. 
add-on
5 
+ _____
e. 
moderate (conscious) sedation included
6 
⨀
 _____
f. 
pending FDA approval status
7 
 
_____
g. 
new
8 
Where is a complete list of additions, deletions, and revisions
located in the CPT manual? _______
9 
Which CPT manual appendix contains a complete list of all modifier
-51 exempt codes? _________
10 
Which CPT manual appendix contains a complete list of add-on
codes? ________________________ 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Appendix P,
 Synchronous Telemedicine Services is a listing of
codes where interaction between a provider and a patient who are
located at different sites can occur, such as medicine code 97802.
Modifier-95 is required to report this interaction and only used with
codes from this appendix, while a star (
★
) is also placed in front of
each code where telemedicine services can be reported.
CPT sections
The CPT manual is composed of six chapters into which all codes and
descriptions are categorized. These chapters are called 
sections.
The sections of the CPT manual
■
 
Evaluation and Management
99201-99499
■
 
Anesthesia
00100-01999
■
 
Surgery
10021-69990
■
 
Radiology
70010-79999
■
 
Pathology and Laboratory
80047-89398
■
 
Medicine
90281-99607
The sections are further divided into subsections, subheadings,
categories, and subcategories. A 
section
 is a chapter that covers one of
the six topics included in the CPT manual: Evaluation/Management
(E/M), Anesthesia, Surgery, Radiology, Pathology/Laboratory, and
Medicine codes. The CPT codes are arranged in numerical order in
each section. Let’s review these six sections.
Sections are divided into 
subsections
. For example, the Surgery
section includes subsections of Integumentary, Musculoskeletal,
Respiratory, Cardiovascular, and so forth.
Example
Section:
Surgery
Subsection:
Cardiovascular System
Subheading:
Arteries and Veins
Category:
Embolectomy/Thrombectomy
Subcategory:
Arterial, With or Without Catheter
Example
Section:
Surgery
Subsection:
Nervous System
Subheading:
Skull, Meninges, and Brain
Category:
Surgery of Skull Base
Subcategory:
Approach Procedures
EXERCISE 8-3
Section, Subsection, Subheading, and
Category
To see an example of section, subsection, subheading, and category,
locate the code 19000 Puncture aspiration of cyst of breast in the CPT
in the Surgery section.
With a CPT beside you, open to the page where CPT code 19000 is
located, or referring to 
Fig. 8-10
, find the information on the top of the
CPT manual page:
Section.
 At the top of the page, the word “Surgery” indicates the
section. Note that this word is followed by a range of numbers, which
is a list of all the code numbers located on that page.
Subsection.
 Also at the top of the page, the phrase “Integumentary
System” indicates the subsection.
Subheading.
 The word “Breast” indicates the subheading.
Category.
 The word “Incision” indicates the category.
In summary, the divisions for the previous example are
Section:
Surgery
Subsection:
Integumentary System
Subheading:
Breast
Category:
Incision
Now you try one.
With a CPT manual open to the page that contains code 30100,
locate the following information for the 30100 code:
1 
Section:
______________________________________________________________________________________
2 
Subsection:
____________________________________________________________________________________
3 
Subheading:
___________________________________________________________________________________
4 
Category:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
FIGURE 8–10
Section, subsection, subheading, and category.
Subsections, 
subheadings, categories,
 and 
subcategories
 are
divisions of sections that are based on anatomy, procedure, condition,
description, or approach.
Using the section, subsection, subheading, and category
information makes it much faster and easier to get around in the CPT
manual.
CPT guidelines
Each section in the CPT manual includes Guidelines. The Guidelines
provide specific information about coding in that section and contain
valuable information for the coder. Guidelines that are applicable to
all codes in the section are found at the beginning of each section (
Fig.
8-11
).
FIGURE 8–11
Section Guidelines.
Notes pertaining to specific codes or groups of codes are listed
before or after the codes (
Fig. 8-12
).
FIGURE 8–12
Specific notes.
The Guidelines and notes may contain definitions of terms,
applicable modifiers, subsection information, unlisted services, special
reports information, or clinical examples. Always read the Guidelines
and notes before coding to help ensure accurate assignment of the
CPT codes.
EXERCISE 8-4
Guidelines
Using the Guidelines for each of the sections, answer the following
questions:
1 
Write the definition of a chief complaint using the E/M Guidelines.
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
According to the Surgery Guidelines, surgical destruction is a part of
a surgical procedure and ____________________ methods of
destruction are not ordinarily listed separately.
3 
According to the Radiology Guidelines, who must sign a written
report to have the report considered part of the radiologic
procedure? ___________________________
4 
Under whose supervision are Pathology and Laboratory services
provided? ______________________
5 
What is the code listed in the Medicine Guidelines that is to be used
to identify materials supplied by the physician that are beyond
those ordinarily included in the service provided? _____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Code format
Procedure and service descriptions are located after the code (
Fig. 8-
13
). These are commonly accepted descriptions of procedures or
services that are provided to patients.
FIGURE 8–13
Code and description format.
There are two types of codes: 
stand-alone codes
 and 
indented
codes
 (
Fig. 8-14
).
FIGURE 8–14
Stand-alone codes and indented codes.
Only the stand-alone codes have the full description; indented
codes are listed under associated stand-alone codes. It is understood
that descriptions for indented codes include that portion of the stand-
alone code description that precedes the semicolon. The purpose of
the semicolon is to save space.
 
CAUTION 
You may not have realized it, but you’ve just been given a critical clue to
coding—the semicolon. The following information will help you understand
why the semicolon is so important.
In 
Fig. 8-14
, the code 26011 is an indented code—the indentation
serves to represent the words “Drainage of finger abscess,” which
appear before the semicolon in CPT code 26010. The semicolon is a
powerful tool in the CPT manual; when you see it, be sure to read the
words before it carefully.
The words following the semicolon can indicate alternative
anatomic sites, alternative procedures, or a description of the extent of
the service.
Example
Alternative Anatomic Site:
27705
Osteotomy; tibia
27707
fibula
27709
tibia and fibula
Alternative Procedure:
31505
Laryngoscopy, indirect; diagnostic (separate procedure)
31510
with biopsy
31511
with removal of foreign body
31512
with removal of lesion
31513
with vocal cord injection
Description of Extent of the Service:
20520
Removal of foreign body in muscle or tendon sheath; simple
20525
deep or complicated
 
CAUTION 
Before assigning an indented code, make sure you refer to the preceding
stand-alone code and read the words that precede the semicolon. That is the
only way to ensure a full description and select a correct code.
EXERCISE 8-5
Code Format
Complete the following:
1 
Describe a stand-alone code.
______________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
Describe an indented code.
______________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________________
3 
Words following the semicolon in stand-alone codes can indicate the
following three things:
a
____________________________________________________________________________________________
b
____________________________________________________________________________________________
c
____________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Modifiers
Modifiers provide additional information to the third-party payer
about services provided to a patient. At times, the five-digit CPT code
may not reflect completely the service or procedure provided. Because
numeric codes, not written procedure descriptions, are required by
third-party payers, additional numbers or letters may be added to the
basic five-digit code to modify the CPT code and provide further
specificity. These additional modifiers may be two numbers, two
letters, or a letter and a number and are appended, or “tacked on,” to
the basic five-digit CPT code. In the HCPCS manual, two-place
modifiers such as -RC and -F1 are used. Notice the HCPCS modifiers
are alpha characters or alphanumeric.
In the CPT system, a modifier is an appended two-digit number,
such as:
Example
-62, two surgeons
or
-51, multiple procedures
The two-digit modifier is added to the five-digit CPT code.
Example
Code 43820 is the CPT procedure code for a gastrojejunostomy,
without vagotomy (removal of part of the vagus nerve). If two
surgeons with different surgical skills participated as primary
surgeons, each performing a specific part of the procedure, the
procedure code 43820 could be altered by the addition of the modifier
-62 to indicate co-surgeons (
Fig. 8-15
).
FIGURE 8–15
Two-digit modifier.
The code would be 43820-62 for a gastrojejunostomy, without
vagotomy, in which two surgeons participated as primary surgeons.
Each physician would submit his or her own bill, indicating code
43820-62.
For a complete listing of all modifiers, see 
Appendix A
 in the CPT
manual. Refer to 
Fig. 8-16
 for an example of the information found in
Appendix A
. Further information regarding modifiers is presented
throughout the following chapters of this text.
FIGURE 8–16
Modifiers in Appendix A.
CPT modifiers are listed first in descending numeric order (e.g., -62-
50), and CPT modifiers are listed before HCPCS modifiers (e.g., -62-
RT) in this book.
EXERCISE 8-6
Modifiers
Using
 
Appendix A
 
of the CPT manual and the information you just
learned, answer the following:
1 
What is the two-digit modifier that indicates two primary surgeons?
____________
2 
If the CPT code is 43820 (gastrojejunostomy without vagotomy) and
two primary surgeons performed the service, the service could be
stated this way: ____________________, by each surgeon.
Use
 
Appendix A
 
of the CPT manual to list the correct two-digit
modifier in the following examples:
3 
Bilateral inguinal herniorrhaphy: ____________
4 
A postoperative ureterotomy patient has to be returned to the
operating room (unplanned) for a complication related to the initial
procedure during the postoperative period: ____________
5 
A decision to perform surgery is made during an evaluation and
management service on the day before or the day of surgery:
____________
6 
Multiple procedures performed during the same surgical session:
____________
7 
A surgical team is required: ____________
8 
Physician A actively assists physician B during a surgical procedure:
____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Unlisted procedures
When developing the CPT manual, the AMA realized that not every
surgical and diagnostic procedure could be listed. There may not be a
code for many procedures that are considered experimental, newly
approved, or seldom used. In addition, medical advancements often
create a variation of procedures currently performed. A procedure or
service not found in the CPT manual can be coded as an unlisted
procedure if no Category I or III exists to describe the
procedure/service provided. For example, when the first heart
transplant was performed, there was no code to report the new
surgical procedure. Until a code was available, the unlisted code for
cardiac surgery was used to report this procedure (
Fig. 8-17
).

FIGURE 8–17
Unlisted service or procedure.
The Surgery Guidelines have unlisted procedure codes listed by
body site or type of procedure. Individually unlisted procedure codes
are also at the end of the subsection or subheading to which they refer.
For example, at the end of the Cardiovascular System subsection,
Heart and Pericardium subheading, is the unlisted cardiac procedure
code 33999, and at the end of the Respiratory System subsection,
Lungs and Pleura subheading is the unlisted lungs/pleura code 32999.
EXERCISE 8-7
Unlisted Procedures
Assuming there is no Category III code available for the procedure
you are reporting, using the CPT Guidelines in the front of the
sections indicated below, locate the five-digit unlisted procedure code
for each of the following:
1 
Surgery
Unlisted procedure; middle ear:
arthroscopy:
esophagus:
Code: ____________________
Code: ____________________
Code: ____________________
2 
Pathology and Laboratory
Unlisted procedure; cytogenetic study:
urinalysis procedure:
chemistry procedure:
Code: ____________________
Code: ____________________
Code: ____________________
3 
Medicine
Unlisted special service, procedure, or report:
Code: ____________________
4 
Radiology
Unlisted procedure; clinical brachytherapy:
Unlisted miscellaneous procedure; diagnostic nuclear medicine:
Code: ____________________
Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Category II codes
Earlier in the chapter you were introduced to Category II codes
located on the AMA website, 
www.ama-assn.org/
. Now it is time to
take a closer look at the purpose of these codes and how they are
reported.
In December of 2006, Congress enacted a law that established a
voluntary program within Medicare that paid physicians a bonus for
reporting these quality measures. The pay-for-reporting program was
the Physician Quality Reporting Initiative (PQRI), later renamed the
Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS). The measures have been
established to determine if the physician is performing certain
elements that are considered to be necessary elements of care. For
example, patients with diabetes mellitus are at a high risk for heart
attack and stroke, and it is very important that these patients control
not only their diabetes but also their blood pressure and cholesterol
levels. The instruction in the PQRS measure for blood pressure
management indicates that at a minimum the diabetic patient’s blood
pressure is to be reported once in a 12-month period for each patient
with diabetes 18-75 years of age. According to the measure, a
controlled pressure is less than 140/80 mm Hg.
The 
systolic
 pressure would be reported with one of the following
codes:
3074F
<130 mm Hg
3075F
130-139 mm Hg
3077F
≥140 mm Hg (≥ means equal to or greater than)
The 
diastolic
 pressure would be reported with one of the following
codes:
3078F
<80 mm Hg
3079F
80-89 mm Hg
3080F
≥90 mm Hg
If the documentation indicated the patient’s blood pressure reading
was 138/100, you would report 3075F for the systolic pressure and
3080F for the diastolic pressure.
In addition to the code, a modifier may be assigned. There are only
4 modifiers approved for use with Category II codes, and they all
report the reason the performance measure was not performed.
1P
medical reasons, such as contraindicated due to adverse drug interaction
2P
patient reason, such as the patient declined for religious reasons
3P
system reasons, such as the equipment to perform the service was not available
8P
not otherwise specified
The measures also state that an E/M code from the CPT or a G code
from the HCPCS coding system are the two types of codes permissible
with these Category II codes. For example, if 99201 (new patient, office
or other patient visit) was reported for a patient with a diagnosis of
diabetes and whose blood pressure reading was 128/87 mm Hg. The
Category II codes 3074F (<130 mm Hg) and 3078F (<80 mm Hg) would
be reported with 99201 because Category II codes are supplemental
codes. HCPCS codes G0270/G0271 (Medical nutrition therapy) may
also be reported with the codes in the range 3074F-3080F.
The diagnoses codes that may be submitted with 3074F-3080F are
also listed in the standards for the PQRS measure. For example, E10-
E11, Diabetes mellitus, and O24, Complications of pregnancy, are
ranges of diagnosis codes that are acceptable for submitting with
3074F-3080F.
The Category II codes are reported in field 24D on the CMS-1500
paper claim and on the electronic claim (837p) in segment SV1, the
professional services segment.
You might wonder why physicians would agree to do all this
additional tracking and coding! CMS pays a bonus to physicians who
report at least 80% of Medicare encounters with quality measures. The
physician’s submissions are tracked by the National Provider
Identification number (NPI) because that is the unique physician
identification that never changes. Even 
if a physician moves from one
clinic to another, the NPI for that physician moves right with him or
her. The bonus is paid not only on those patients that the physician
submits quality measures for but on all Medicare services provided
during that 12-month period. For example, if a physician receives
$200,000 of Medicare revenue for the year and has reported on at least
80% of his or her encounters for the year with a maximum of three
measures per patient (or less if applicable), that physician would
receive a $3,000 bonus from CMS. This is a significant amount of
money, especially when you consider that this is for reporting
measures that the physician would usually perform anyway. The
numbers get even more impressive, when applied to a group practice.
For example, a clinic has 40 physicians and each generated about
$200,000 annually in Medicare revenue. The PQRS bonus could mean
an additional $120,000 for the practice. That is a big financial incentive
to record, code, and submit the measures. Further, there is nothing a
coder likes more than additional codes—it is, after all, great job
security!
You can anticipate that these measures will move from voluntary to
mandatory, and tracking these measures will be just another element
of the ever-changing world of coding.
 For more information on
PQRS, check out 
www.cms.gov/pqrs
.
Category III codes
Category III codes report emerging technology and are temporary
codes used for up to 5 years. If there is a Category III code for the
service or procedure you are reporting, you must use the Category III
code, not the Category I unlisted code.
Category I codes (Level 1) are those that are widely used to describe
services and procedures that have been approved by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), if appropriate. Category I codes also
relate to services and procedures that have been proven to have
clinical effectiveness. Category III codes describe services and
procedures that may not have been approved by the FDA, may not be
widely offered, and may not have been proven to be clinically
effective. The use of the Category III codes allows physicians, other
health care professionals, third-party payers, researchers, and health
policy experts to identify emerging trends in health care.
Format of category III codes. 
The codes have five digits—four numbers and a letter: for example,
+0095T (removal of total disc arthroplasty, each additional interspace,
cervical). Prior to the existence of Category III codes, you would have
reported this procedure using an unlisted Category I code, because
there was no specific code that described disc arthroplasty for each
additional cervical interspace. Now that there is a Category III code
available, you must report the disc arthroplasty for each additional
cervical interspace in conjunction with Category I code 22864,
reporting the Category III code +0095T, not an unlisted code from
Category I.
Category III codes may or may not eventually receive Category I
code status and be placed in the main part of the CPT.
 
QUICK CHECK 8-2
1. 
A Category III code would be reported rather than a Category I
____________ code.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Publication of category III codes. 
New Category III codes are released twice a year (January and July)
via the AMA website. The full set of temporary codes is published in
the next edition of the CPT in a section following the Medicine section.
Special reports
Special reports must accompany claims when an unusual, new,
seldom used, or Category I unlisted code, or Category III code is
submitted. The special report should include an adequate definition or
description of the 
nature, extent,
 and 
need
 for the procedure or
service and the 
time, effort,
 and 
equipment
 necessary to provide the
service. The special report helps the third-party payer determine the
appropriateness of the care and the medical necessity of the service
provided.
 
From the Trenches
What advice do you give to a coder looking to advance or move up?
“Enlarge your circle of influence, investigate other specialties, look to areas
of coding compliance, attend workshops, become certified, and continue to
learn.”
NANCY
 
QUICK CHECK 8-3
1. 
Special reports must be submitted with claims for procedures that
are unusual, new, seldom used, or use Category I ____________
codes or Category ____________ codes.
 
(Answers are located in
Appendix C
)
Starting with the index
The CPT index is located at the back of the CPT manual and is
arranged alphabetically. Index headings located at the top right and
left corners of the index pages direct the coder to the entries that are
included on that page, much like a dictionary. Use of index headings
speeds location of the term (
Fig. 8-18
).
FIGURE 8–18
CPT manual index headings.
Locating the terms
Code numbers are displayed in the CPT index in one of the ways
shown in the following example.
Example
single code:
38115
multiple codes:
26645, 26650
range of codes:
22310-22325
See 
Fig. 8-19
 for an example of the display in the index using the
single, multiple, and range formats.
FIGURE 8–19
Code display.
Single code
When only one code is stated, you should verify the code in the main
(tabular) portion of the CPT manual to ensure its accuracy.
Multiple codes
The use of a 
comma
 between code numbers indicates the presence of
only those numbers displayed. If more than one code is listed, then all
codes must be reviewed in the tabular to make an accurate choice.
Range of codes
A range is indicated by a 
hyphen.
 When a range is given in the index,
you must look up each code within the range in the tabular of the CPT
manual to select the appropriate code from the range. There may even
be multiple ranges listed.
 
CAUTION 
Never code directly from the index. You can’t be sure you have the right code
until you have located the code in the main portion of the CPT manual and
read the information presented there regarding the specifics of the code.
The index is in alphabetic order by main terms and is further
divided by subterms. 
Fig. 8-20
 illustrates the main term and subterm
as used in the index. Having identified the main term of the service or
procedure, you can locate the term in the index. When you are just
beginning to use the CPT manual, it may be difficult to locate the
main term. Not being able to locate a term in the index can be very
frustrating, but don’t be discouraged if you don’t identify the main
term on the first try. This is a skill that is learned by practice, and part
of the practice is making mistakes. Soon you’ll be locating those main
terms quickly. Just keep thinking about the service or procedure and
looking up the words in the index.
 
FIGURE 8–20
CPT manual index indicating main terms and subterms.
Some basic location methods will help you to locate these main
terms.
Location methods
■
 
Service or Procedure
■
 
Anatomic Site
■
 
Condition or Disease
■
 
Synonym
■
 
Eponym
■
 
Abbreviation
Let’s take these location methods and apply each one in the
following exercise.
EXERCISE 8-8
Term Practice
Service or procedure
1 
When using the service or procedure location method, “repair”
would be the main term in “
repair
 of a fracture of a femur.”
a 
Locate “Repair” in the index of the CPT manual.
Using this location method, “Repair” is the
main term and the subterms are “Fracture” and
“Femur.”
b 
Under the main term “Repair,” locate the
subterm “Femur.” If you were to look under
“Repair” and then look for the term “Fracture,”
you wouldn’t find “Fracture,” because listed
under “Repair” are the anatomic divisions that
can be repaired. “Fracture” isn’t an anatomic
division, so it isn’t located under “Repair.” It
can be just as difficult to locate the correct
subterm as it is to find the main term.
Right now, don’t be concerned with looking up the codes in the
main part of the CPT manual. Concentrate on learning how to locate
the main term and subterms in the index of the CPT manual.
Anatomic site
2 
The second method of locating an anatomic site uses the word
“femur”
 as the main term, and the subterms are “fracture” and
“repair.”
a 
Locate “Femur” in the index of the CPT manual.
b 
Under the main term “Femur,” locate the
subterm “Fracture.”
c 
Notice that the entry “Fracture” is further
divided based on repair type (e.g., closed
treatment) or anatomic location (e.g., distal).
Condition or disease
3 
The third location method focuses on the condition or disease. In
this instance you would use the main term 
“fracture”
 as a
condition.
a 
Locate the main term “Fracture” in the index.
b 
Locate the subterm “Femur.”
The use of the first three location methods will usually get you to
the applicable codes in the index. If you try each of the first three
methods and still can’t locate the codes in the index, don’t despair; try
one of the other location methods: synonym, eponym, or
abbreviation.
Synonym
4 
The fourth location method involves synonyms. Synonyms are
words with similar meanings.
a 
Stone is a 
synonym
 for calculus. Suppose, then,
you couldn’t think of the correct medical term,
but you could think of the word “stone.” In that
case, you could look up “Stone, Kidney” in the
CPT manual index, and that entry would direct
you to:
see
 Calculus, Removal, Kidney
Eponym
5 
The fifth location method uses 
eponyms.
 Eponyms are things that
are named after people. For example, the Barr Procedure—a
tendon-transfer procedure—was named after the person who
developed it.
a 
Locate “Barr Procedure” in the CPT manual
index. You are directed to:
See
 Tendon, Transfer, Leg, Lower
Abbreviation
6 
The sixth location method uses 
abbreviations.
 Abbreviations are
common in medicine for names of drugs, diseases, and procedures.
a 
Locate the abbreviation “INH” in the index of
the CPT manual. You are directed to:
See
 Drug Assay
Medicine uses many synonyms, eponyms, and abbreviations. A
good medical dictionary that contains the most common synonyms,
eponyms, and abbreviations will be a necessity for you.
Locate each of the following main terms in the CPT manual index,
and then locate the subterms and secondary subterms and fill in the
code(s) you find there:
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
You are now ready to put your term location skills to work by
doing the next exercise.
EXERCISE 8-9
Main Term Location
Identify the main terms in the following examples and write the main
term on the line provided. Then locate the main terms and any
subterms in the CPT manual index. Write the code listed in the index
for that service or procedure on the line provided.
1 
Description: Emergency Department Services, Physician Direction of
Advanced Life Support
a 
Main term:
_____________________________________________________________________________
b 
Locate the code available in the index of the
CPT manual for Emergency Department
Services, Physician Direction of Advanced Life
Support.
Code: ____________________
2 
Condition/Disease: Intertrochanteric femoral fracture (closed
treatment)
a 
Main term:
____________________________________________________________________________
b 
Locate the code available in the index of the
CPT manual for intertrochanteric femoral
fracture (closed treatment).
Code: ____________________
3 
Procedure: Removal of gallbladder calculi by means of an open
procedure
a 
Main term:
____________________________________________________________________________
b 
Locate the code available in the index of the
CPT manual for removal of gallbladder calculi.
Code: ____________________
4 
Anatomic site: Lung, bullae excision
a 
Main term:
____________________________________________________________________________
b 
Locate the code available in the index of the
CPT manual for excision of bullae of lung.
Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
As you can probably see from this exercise, there are often many
ways to locate an item in the index. The same word can serve as a
main term or a subterm, depending on the location method you are
using. In addition, the annual updating of the CPT results in
numerous changes within the index.
You will be locating terms in the CPT manual index throughout
your study of this text. For your ready reference, there is also a
guideline at the beginning of the index in the CPT manual that
contains directions for the use of the CPT manual index. 
Appendix B
of this text will list not only the correct code answer, but also one
index location for that code.
 For example, if the correct answer is
99203, the following appears after the code: (Office and/or Other
Outpatient Services, New Patient). It is difficult to locate items in the
CPT index when you begin coding, so if you get stuck and just cannot
locate the index entry, you will be able to find one location following
each code in 
Appendix B
 of this text.
 
QUICK CHECK 8-4
1. 
In the CPT manual there are instructions for using the index. These
instructions appear just before the index. The heading on this page
is Index, Instructions for the ____________________ of the
____________ Index.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
See
“See” is a 
cross-reference
 term found in the index of the CPT manual.
The term directs you to another term or other terms.
“See”
 indicates that the correct code will be found elsewhere.
Example
Anticoagulant
See
 Clotting Inhibitors
EXERCISE 8-10
See
Complete the following:
1 
Locate the term “Renal Disease Services” in the CPT index. You are
directed to
_____________________________________________________________________________________________.
2 
Locate the abbreviation “ANA” in the CPT index. The entry you find
is ___________________________________________.
3 
Locate the term “Arm” in the CPT index. You are directed to
___________________________________________________.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 8, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of
the chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each
objective (Answers are located in 
Appendix E
):
1 Providers are reimbursed for the procedures and services rendered
based on what codes? ____________
2 What organization first published the CPT coding system?
____________
3 A common, concise coding system is required by what law?
____________
4 Name the box location on the CMS-1500 form for CPT/HCPCS
codes. ____________
5 What symbol indicates that the description for a code has changed?
____________
6 What appendix are modifiers located in?
_________________________________________________________________
7 How many sections are in the CPT manual? ____________
8 Guidelines that are applicable to all codes are found at the beginning
of what? ____________________________________
9 Before assigning an indented code, refer to the preceding
_________________________________________________ code.
10 What appendix are clinical examples located in?
___________________________________________________________
11 A procedure or service not found in the CPT manual may be coded
as what? _____________________________________
12 Reporting a Category III code requires a(n) _________________
__________________ to accompany the claim.
13 What type of CPT codes have four numbers followed by a letter?
______________________________________________
14 Single codes displayed in the CPT index should be verified in the
_____________________ portion of the CPT manual to ensure
accuracy.
Chapter 8, part I, theory
Do not use your CPT manual for this part of the review.
1 CPT stands for _____________________________________________
(three words).
2 The CPT manual often reflects the technologic advances made in
medicine with Category ___________ code (use roman numeral).
3 The CPT manual is ever changing and is updated annually to reflect
technologic advances and editorial
_____________________________________.
4 What type of code ends with 99?
______________________________________________
5 Coding information that pertains to an entire section is located in the
_______________________.
6 Category ________ codes provide supplemental information and do
not substitute for a Category I codes (use roman numeral in
answer).
7 What is the name of the two-digit number or a digit and a number
that is located after the CPT code number and provides more detail
about the code? ______________________________________________
8 A list of all the modifiers is located in Appendix
_______________________ of the CPT manual.
9 When using an unlisted or Category III code, third-party payers
usually require the submission of what?
_____________________________________________ (two words)
10 Additions, deletions, and revisions are listed in which appendix?
____________
11 A listing of all add-on codes is located in which appendix?
____________
12 The symbol used between two code numbers to indicate that a
range is available is a(n)
_____________________________________________.
Using
 
Fig. 8-21
, identify the category, section, subheading, and
subsection.
FIGURE 8–21
 Identify the section, subsection, subheading, and
category.
13 ____________________________________________
14 ____________________________________________
15 ____________________________________________
16 ____________________________________________
17 The symbol that indicates a product is pending FDA approval is
the ____________ (two words).
18 A complete list of the codes designated with the symbol that
indicates a product is pending FDA approval is listed in this
appendix of the CPT manual:
____________________________________________
19 The Genetic Testing Code Modifiers are listed in this appendix of
the CPT manual: _______________________________
Chapter 8, part II, practical
Use your CPT manual for this part of the review. Using
 
Appendix A
 
of the
CPT manual, list the correct two-digit modifiers for the following services
(make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answer. -XX):
20 Repeat procedure by the same individual: ____________
21 Surgical care only: ____________
22 Anesthesia by the surgeon: ____________
23 Bilateral procedure: ____________
Assuming there is no Category III code for the unlisted procedure you are
reporting, locate the following unlisted procedure codes using the Surgery
Guidelines:
24 Orbit: Code: ____________________
25 Rectum: Code: ____________________
26 Lips: Code: ____________________
27 General musculoskeletal: Code: ____________________
Using the index of the CPT manual, match an example of each of the
following types of code display:
28 Single code: _______________________________
29 Multiple code: _____________________________
30 Range: ____________________________________
a example has a comma between two codes
b example has one code
c example has a hyphen between two codes
Using the index of the CPT manual, locate the following terms and write
what the index note directs you to do:
31 T4 Total: __________________________________
32 SHBG: ____________________________________
33 Radius: ____________________________________
34 Physical Therapy: __________________________
Using the index of the CPT manual, locate the code(s) for the following
(you do not need to check the codes in the tabular for this exercise):
35 Repair, Abdomen: ____________________
36 Bypass Graft, Excision, Abdomen: ____________________
37 Catheterization, Arteriovenous Shunt, Initial Access:
____________________
38 Cystotomy, with Drainage: ____________________
39 Fracture, Femur, Intertrochanteric, Closed Treatment:
____________________
40 Alveoloplasty: ____________________
41 Duodenotomy: ____________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 9
Introduction to the level II
national codes (HCPCS)
 
What is the most rewarding part about being a medical coder? 
“Knowing you have played a significant role in helping people live
healthier lives to their fullest through the implementation of coding
quality initiatives.”
David S. Brigner, MA, BA, CPC
Sr. Director of Training & Education
 
UHG/OptumHealth/WellMed
 
San Antonio, Texas
CHAPTER TOPICS
History of National Level Codes
Updating the HCPCS Manual
HCPCS Format
National Physician Fee Schedule
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
List the major features of Level II National Codes, HCPCS.
2 
Recognize the code groupings within HCPCS.
3 
Review Temporary Procedure and Professional Services.
4 
Describe the HCPCS code format.
5 
Understand the Table of Drugs.
6 
Demonstrate the ability to assign HCPCS codes.
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
History of national level codes
CPT coding is only one of a two-part coding system called HCPCS
(pronounced hick-picks). The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS), formerly the Health Care Financing Administration,
developed the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System in 1983.
The HCPCS is a collection of codes that represents procedures,
supplies, products, and services that may be provided to Medicare
and Medicaid beneficiaries and to individuals enrolled in private
health insurance programs.
 
CODING SHOT
HCPCS is a system for identifying items and certain services. It is not
a methodology or system for making coverage or payment
determinations, and the existence of a code does not, of itself,
determine coverage or non-coverage for an item or service. (HCPCS
Level II Coding Procedures
(
https://www.cms.gov/medicare/coding/medhcpcsgeninfo/downloads/hcpcsleveliicodingprocedures7-
2011.pdf
)
CMS RULES
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA) required CMS to adopt standards for coding systems that
are used for reporting health care transactions. In October of 2003, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) delegated authority
under the HIPAA legislation to CMS to maintain and distribute
HCPCS Level II Codes. As stated in 42 C.F.R. 414.40 (a): CMS
establishes uniform national definitions of services, codes to represent
services, and payment modifiers to the codes.
Two levels of codes
HCPCS is divided into two levels or groups.
Level I
 HCPCS code sets include Current Procedural Terminology
(CPT) codes in the CPT manual, which are developed, maintained,
and copyrighted by the AMA. The CPT is the primary coding system
used in the outpatient setting to code professional services provided
to patients.
Level II
 HCPCS codes (National Codes) are approved and
maintained jointly by the Alpha-Numeric Workgroup, consisting of
the CMS, the Health Insurance Association of America, and the Blue
Cross and Blue Shield Association. Revised on a quarterly basis, Level
II codes are five-character alphanumeric codes representing physician
and nonphysician services, products, and supplies that are not
represented in the Level I codes (such as ambulance services, durable
medical equipment, drugs, prosthetics, and orthotics).
In some instances, Medicare requires the use of a Level II HCPCS
code to override an already existing CPT code.
Example
Fluzone (IIV3), 0.5 mL
CPT (Level I) code: 90658 (other than Medicare)
HCPCS (Level II) code: Q2038 (Medicare).
Level III (Local Codes) are no longer available since the
implementation of HIPAA in 1996, although some were integrated
into the National Codes (HCPCS). Developed by Medicare carriers or
state payers for use at the local (carrier) level, Level III codes were
five-character alphanumeric codes representing physician and
nonphysician services that were not represented in the Level I (CPT)
or Level II codes.
CPT codes do not cover all services that are provided to patients.
Allied health care professionals—such as dentists, orthodontists, and
various technical support services, such as ambulance services—are
not specifically reportable with the CPT coding system. There are also
no specific codes in the CPT system for many of the supplies that are
used in patient care (e.g., drugs, durable medical equipment,
prosthetics, and orthotics). Reporting of National Codes is mandatory
on all Medicare and Medicaid claims submitted for payment for
services of the previously listed professionals. Although many of the
National Codes were developed for use when reporting for services
rendered to Medicare patients, many third-party payers now require
that providers use the National Codes when submitting bills for non-
Medicare patients too, because the system allows for continuity and
specificity. This uniformity also helps the effort to collect uniform
health service data.
National Codes are not used by health care facilities to report
services provided to inpatients. Inpatient health care facilities use the
diagnosis (ICD-10-CM) as the basis of payment for their services and
assign codes from ICD-10-PCS for inpatient procedures. The two
levels of National Codes are used in outpatient settings (including
physicians’ offices) where the basis of payment is the service
rendered, while the diagnosis codes instead serve to establish medical
necessity.
 
QUICK CHECK 9-1
1. 
What is the code range for Drugs? ____________________
2. 
In what publication are these codes (from Question 1) published?
a.
 HCPCS
b.
 CPT
c.
 CMT
d.
 ICD
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Code groupings
The first digit in a national code is a letter such as A, B, C, D, E, G, H,
J, K, L, M, P, Q, R, S, T, or V that is followed by four numbers. The
alphanumeric listing contains headings of groups of codes, as noted
below and illustrated in 
Fig. 9-1
.
■
 
A
Codes
Transportation Services including Ambulance; Medical and Surgical Supplies, Gradient Compression Stockings;
Wound Care; Respiratory Durable Medical Equipment, Inexpensive and Routinely Purchased;
Administrative, Miscellaneous, and Investigational
■
 
B
Codes
Enteral and Parenteral Therapy
■
 
C
Codes
CMS Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment System
■
 
D
Codes
Dental Procedures
■
 
E
Codes
Durable Medical Equipment; Miscellaneous; Skin Protection, Wheelchair; Arm Support; Gait Trainer
■
 
G
Codes
Temporary Procedures/Professional Services
■
 
H
Codes
Behavioral Health and/or Substance Abuse Treatment Services
■
 
J
Codes
Drugs Other Than Chemotherapy; Chemotherapy Drugs
■
 
K
Codes
Temporary Codes Assigned To DME Regional Carriers
■
 
L
Codes
Orthotics; Prosthetics
■
 
M
Codes
Other Medical Services
■
 
P
Codes
Laboratory Services
■
 
Q
Codes
Temporary Codes Assigned by CMS
■
 
R
Codes
Diagnostic Radiology Services
■
 
S
Codes
Temporary National Codes Established by Private Payers
■
 
T
Codes
Temporary National Codes Established by Medicaid
■
 
V
Codes
Vision Services; Hearing Services
 
FIGURE 9–1
CMS’s Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System
(HCPCS), National Codes.
Note that following the heading (in 
Fig. 9-1
) is the range of codes
available for assignment in the category. There are also subheadings
preceding the codes to identify the type of codes that follow.
Note: In, 
9-9
, and 
9-10
, the HCPCS codes are samples for the purpose
of illustration only. They may not be displayed as such in the current
HCPCS manual.
 
FIGURE 9-2
Example of HCPCS codes with carrier discretion
 
FIGURE 9-3
HCPCS codes Q0081-Q0085
 
FIGURE 9-4
HCPCS index, National Codes.
 
FIGURE 9-5
HCPCS index entries.
 
FIGURE 9-6
HCPCS main text display.
 
FIGURE 9-7
HCPCS modifiers.
FIGURE 9-9
Example from Table of Drugs.
 
FIGURE 9-10
HCPCS J codes.
Temporary procedure/professional services. 
Codes beginning with the letters G, K, Q, S, and T are for temporary
assignment of items and services. These codes remain active until a
definitive decision can be made about appropriate code assignment or
deletion.
G codes 
The G codes are temporary codes used to identify professional
healthcare procedures and services when no CPT code has been
established.
Example
G0402 reports “Welcome to Medicare” initial preventive physical
examination. This is a face-to-face visit for services limited to a new
Medicare beneficiary during the first 12 months of Medicare
enrollment.
In addition, G codes are used to report some services for Medicare
beneficiaries when other carriers would instead report the existing
CPT codes. 
Figure 9-2
 illustrates codes where carrier discretion might
apply.
Example
G0008 reports administration of influenza virus vaccine for a
Medicare patient. For all other carriers, report CPT code 90471.
K codes 
Assigned by CMS, the K codes are temporary codes for the use of
Durable Medical Equipment (DME).
Example
K0901 Knee orthosis (KO), single upright, thigh and calf, with
adjustable flexion and extension joint (unicentric or polycentric),
medial-lateral and rotation control, with or without varus/valgus
adjustment, prefabricated, off-the-shelf.
Q codes 
The Q codes are used to identify services that are not reported with a
CPT code, such as drugs, biologicals, and types of medical
equipment/services (
Fig. 9-3
). However, while Q codes are not
identified by Level I HCPCS, these codes are still required for
processing claims.
S codes 
S codes are temporary Blue Cross/Blue Shield (private payer) codes
that are not valid for Medicare or Medicaid patients.
Example
S0265 Genetic counseling, under physician supervision, each 15
minutes.
T codes 
T codes are used by State Medicaid agencies for items without
permanent national codes, but meet a national Medicaid program
operating need.
Example
T1016 reports case management, each 15 minutes (with valid
documentation)
T1017 reports targeted case management, each 15 minutes (with
valid documentation)
 
QUICK CHECK 9-2
Match the temporary code heading with the correct alpha category:
Alpha Category:  G   K   Q   S
1. 
Temporary National Codes (BC/BS)
____
2. 
Temporary procedure and professional services
____
3. 
DME (Durable Medical Equipment)
____
4. 
Temporary procedures, services, and supplies
____
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Miscellaneous codes 
Miscellaneous (unclassified) codes are reported when no existing
Level II code adequately describes the service or item being billed, or
to serve as a placeholder until more specific HCPCS codes are
identified. However, additional information to support the use of
miscellaneous codes must be provided for payer review, such as:
■
 
Description
■
 
Manufacturer name
■
 
Brand/generic name, dose and NDC number (drugs)
■
 
Product name and number
■
 
Price
■
 
Explanation of patient need
Submitting miscellaneous HCPCS codes without further
explanation or accompanying documentation (depending on payer
requirements) will result in a denial until the necessary information is
documented and resubmitted.
Table 9-1
 lists all the miscellaneous codes found throughout the
HCPCS code set.
Table 9–1
MISCELLANEOUS HCPCS CODES
Code
Description
A4335
Incontinence supply, miscellaneous
A4421
Ostomy supply, miscellaneous
A4913
Miscellaneous dialysis supplies, not otherwise classified
A9698
Nonradioactive contrast imaging material, not otherwise classified, per study
A9699
Radiopharmaceutical, therapeutic, not otherwise classified
A9900
Miscellaneous DME supply, accessory, and/or service component of another HCPCS code
A9999
Miscellaneous DME supply or accessory, not otherwise specified
E1399
Durable medical equipment, miscellaneous
G0235
Pet imaging, any site, not otherwise specified
J3490
Unclassified drugs
J3590
Unclassified biologics
J7599
Immunosuppressive drug, not otherwise specified
J7699
NOC drugs, inhalation solution, administered through DME
J7799
NOC drugs, other than inhalation drugs, administered through DME
J8498
Antiemetic drug, rectal/suppository, not otherwise classified
J8499
Prescription drug, oral non chemotherapeutic, NOS
J8597
Antiemitic drug, oral, not otherwise specified
J8999
Prescription drug, oral, chemotherapeutic, NOS
J9999
Not otherwise classified, antineoplastic drug
L8499
Unlisted procedure for miscellaneous prosthetic services
Q4050
Cast supplies, for unlisted types and materials of casts
Q4051
Splint supplies, misc. (includes thermoplastics, strapping, fasteners, padding and other supplies)
Q4082
Drug or biological, NOC, Part B Drug Competitive Acquisition Program (CAP)
S8189
Tracheostomy supply, not otherwise classified
S3870
Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) microarray testing for developmental delay, autism spectrum disorder
and/or intellectual disability
V2199
Not otherwise classified, single vision lens
V2797
Vision supply, accessory and/or service component of another HCPCS vision code
V2799
Vision item or service, miscellaneous
V5299
Hearing service, miscellaneous
CMS RULES
Claims with Miscellaneous Codes (example: HCPCS code E1399
describes “durable medical equipment, miscellaneous” or “A4649
Surgical supply; miscellaneous”) are manually reviewed, the item or
service being billed must be clearly described, and pricing
information must be provided along with documentation to explain
why the item or service is needed by the beneficiary.
(HCPCS Level II Coding Procedures
(
https://www.cms.gov/medicare/coding/medhcpcsgeninfo/downloads/hcpcsleveliicodingprocedures7-
2011.pdf
))
Updating the HCPCS manual
All codes and descriptions are updated annually by the CMS in
November for use the following January 1. Because the codes are
changing throughout the year, updates are also provided quarterly
online. It is very important to use the most current HCPCS manual
and stay up-to-date on all code changes, revisions and/or deleted
codes with the quarterly updates to provide quality data and ensure
appropriate reimbursement.
 HCPCS quarterly updates are
available on the companion website at 
www.codingupdates.com
 or
the CMS website at
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/HCPCSReleaseCodeSets/HCPCS-
Quarterly-Update.html
HCPCS format
 
CAUTION 
HCPCS manuals vary considerably depending on publisher.
The HCPCS manual includes the general guidelines for use of the
National Codes, a list of modifiers, the codes, a Table of Drugs, and an
index. We begin our study of the HCPCS manual at the index.
Index
The index is in alphabetical order and includes main terms and
subterms (
Fig. 9-4
). Publishers of HCPCS manuals have a variety of
entries in their individual manuals, so expect to see variations in the
number and type of index entries. You have to be able to locate items
in the index in order to be able to identify the correct code. The main
index terms include tests, services, supplies, orthoses, prostheses,
medical equipment, drugs, therapies, and some medical and surgical
procedures. The subterms of the index are listed under the main term
to which they apply, along with the code.
Example
Blood 
glucose monitor
 is found under the entry:
Monitor
blood glucose, home, E0607
The entries in the index of the National Codes may be listed under
more than one main term. For example, surgical kit can be found
under the two entries “Kits” and “Surgical,” as illustrated in 
Fig. 9-5
.
Alphanumeric listing
From the index, you turn to the code in the alphanumeric listing. The
entries in the alphanumeric listing further explain what is included in
the code.
The venous pressure clamp code is shown as it appears in the
alphanumeric listing in 
Fig. 9-6
. Note that A4918 specifies “each.”
General rules
General rules for coding using the National Codes are as follows:
1. 
Never code directly from the index. Always use both the
alphanumeric listing and the index.
2. 
Analyze the statement or description provided that designates the
item that requires a code.
3. 
Identify the main term in the index.
4. 
Check for relevant subterms under the main term. Verify the
meaning of any unfamiliar abbreviations.
5. 
Note the code(s) found after the selected main term or subterm.
6. 
After locating the term and the code in the index, verify the code in
the tabular to ensure the specificity of the code.
7. 
In most cases, for each entry a specific code is provided. In some
cases, you are referred to a range of codes among which you can
locate the required code. You must review the entire range of codes in
the tabular to locate the correct entry.
If you are referred to a single code, locate that
code in the tabular. Verify the code and
description to be sure that you have selected the
correct code to describe the item you are
reporting.
8. 
In all cases, when locating an entry in the index, it is necessary to
look at all descriptors under the main term and subterms in order to
identify the correct entry and to locate the code in the tabular.
 
QUICK CHECK 9-3
In the HCPCS index, locate the main term “Aerosol.” Identify the
subterms that represent:
a. 
compressor E0571, E0572
b. 
compressor filter A7013–A7014
c. 
mask A7015
1. 
A single code
____
2. 
A range of codes
____
3. 
Multiple codes
____
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Modifiers
There are more than 50 alphabetical modifiers available for
assignment to add further specificity to the five-digit national code.
For example, modifiers can be used to specify the service provider,
specify the anatomic site, or add specificity (
Fig. 9-7
).
HCPCS modifiers may be applied when a coder recognizes more
specificity is needed, or in some cases a payer may request the use of a
modifier for further clarification.
Example
-F6 Right hand, second digit
-JA Administered intravenously
-KA Add on option/accessory for wheelchair
-T1 Left foot, second digit
Level II National Modifiers are found in the HCPCS manual
(preceding the A Codes), while 
Appendix A
 of the CPT also contains
some of the Level II, HCPCS/National modifiers.
Medicare advanced beneficiary notice of noncoverage
(ABN) there are four medicare advanced beneficiary
specific modifiers:
-GA 
Indicates that a signed waiver of liability statement, also known as an
ABN form (
Fig. 9-8
), is on file. Thus the patient is informed that the
item or service may be denied by Medicare.
FIGURE 9-8
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Advance
Beneficiary Notice (ABN)
-GX 
Appended for noncovered charges only, Medicare will reject all
claims with modifier -GX and assignment is voluntary under payer
policy.
-GY 
Appended when an item or service is statutorily excluded or does not
meet the definition of any Medicare benefit.
-GZ 
Appended when an item or service is expected to be denied as not
reasonable and necessary. Used when no Advance Beneficiary Notice
(ABN) is signed by the beneficiary, thus the provider is assuming cost
liability.
 
CAUTION 
Do not report modifiers -GA, -GX, -GY, or -GZ together. The only
exception is reporting modifier -GX with -GY which indicates the
patient signed a voluntary ABN for a service excluded by Medicare.
 
CODING SHOT
Effective January 1, 2015, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) established four new HCPCS modifiers collectively
referred to as modifiers -X{EPSU} to define subsets of modifier -59.
For more details, see page 271 in 
Chapter 10
.
EXERCISE 9-1
Modifiers
Match the following description to the correct modifier:
1 
-AX ____
a. 
Drug amount discarded
2 
-E4 ____
b. 
Right hand, fifth digit
3 
-P1 ____
c. 
Item/service expected to deny
4 
-A6 ____
d. 
Related to trauma or injury
5 
-F9 ____
e. 
Lower right eyelid
6 
-JW ____
f. 
Item furnished with dialysis services
7 
-ST ____
g. 
Dressing for six wounds
8 
-RC ____
h. 
CLIA-waived test
9 
-QW ____
i. 
Right coronary artery
10 
-GZ ____
j. 
Normal healthy patient
Table of drugs
J codes identify the drugs administered and the amounts or dosages
given. The National Codes contain a Table of Drugs (
Fig. 9-9
) to direct
the user to the appropriate drug titles and the corresponding codes. J
codes refer to drugs only by generic name. However, if a drug is
known only by a brand or trade name, you will be directed to the
generic name of the drug and then to the associated J or Q code by a
cross-reference system within the table. The 
Physicians’ Desk Reference
(PDR) is a publication that contains prescribing information on
prescription drugs and lists the drugs by generic and brand names.
The PDR is a valuable resource for the coder when using the Table of
Drugs.
 
CODING SHOT
Pay close attention to the dosage amounts specified for each code in
the alphanumeric listing. For example, the description for J0561
(Injection, penicillin G benzathine) notes 100,000 units; however, the
usual dosage ordered is 1.2 million Bicillin-CR (IM) per 2 ml syringe.
Therefore, since it would take 12 of the 100,000 units if injecting the
usual dosage of 1.2 million, the billing units would be 12 and
reported as J0561 x 12.
Routes of administration of drugs.
The route of administration column (see 
fig. 9-9
) lists the most
common methods of delivering the referenced generic drug. the
official definitions for level ii j codes generally describe administration
other than by the oral method. orally given drugs are not usually
provided in a physician’s office but are bought at a pharmacy after the
visit. therefore, with a few exceptions, orally delivered drugs are
omitted from the route of administration column. the following
abbreviations and listings are used in the route of administration
column:
INJ
Injection
IT
Intrathecal
IV
Intravenous
IM
Intramuscular
SC
Subcutaneous
INH
Inhalant solution
VAR
Various routes
OTH
Other routes
Intravenous administration includes all methods, such as gravity
infusion, injections, and timed pushes. When several routes of
administration are listed, the first listing is the most common method.
A “VAR” posting denotes various routes of administration and is
used for drugs that are commonly administered into joints, cavities, or
tissues, and as topical applications. Listings posted with “OTH” alert
the coder to other administration methods, for example, suppositories
or catheter injections. 
Fig. 9-10
 illustrates J code information as listed
in the tabular.
 
QUICK CHECK 9-4
1. 
Medication Administration Route information is provided with the
Table of Drugs and Chemicals.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 9-2
Table of Drugs
Define the following routes of administration for drugs:
1 
Intrathecal
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
Intravenous
___________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
3 
Intramuscular
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
4 
Subcutaneous
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
5 
Inhalant solution
________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Durable medical equipment
Durable medical equipment (DME) is equipment used by a patient
with a chronic disabling condition, and the term also includes some
equipment that is used only temporarily until the patient has healed.
Claims for DME and related supplies can be paid only if the items
meet the Medicare definition of covered DME and are medically
necessary. The determination of medical necessity is made using
documentation written by the physician. The documentation can
include medical records, a plan of care, discharge plans, and
prescriptions or forms explicitly designed to document medical
necessity. These forms are referred to as Certificates of Medical
Necessity (CMN). An example of a CMN is CMS-848 for a
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator (
Fig. 9-11
).
 
FIGURE 9-11
CMS Certificate of Medical Necessity—TENS.
Claims for other items require the use of the CMN, for example,
power-operated vehicles, air-fluidized beds, decubitus care pads, seat-
lift mechanisms, and paraffin baths.
Physician completion of the required medical documentation
ensures that the DME items furnished to a Medicare beneficiary are
those specifically needed for the unique medical condition of the
patient. The CMS also requires the use of form CMS-484 for the
Certification of Medical Necessity—Oxygen (
Fig. 9-12
).
 
FIGURE 9-12
CMS Certificate of Medical Necessity—Oxygen.
 The forms download website
of CMS is 
www.cms.gov/cmsforms/cmsforms/list.asp#topofpage
.
National physician fee schedule
Each fall, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services produces
the National Physician Fee Schedule, which lists all HCPCS and CPT
codes along with the amount allocated for each service and the
covered/noncovered status of each service. A list of fees for drugs is
produced on a quarterly basis based on the current Average Sales
Price (ASP) of each drug.
The CY 2016 PFS 
Final Rule
 with comment period was published in
the Federal Register on October 30, 2015. 
Fig. 9-13
 illustrates a portion
of the National Physician Fee Schedule.
 
FIGURE 9-13
Example of CMS’s National Physician Fee Schedule
Relative Value File indicates HCPCS code and description along with
the conversion factor for that code for the following year.
 The Physician Fee Schedule is
on the CMS website at
www.cms.gov/PhysicianFeeSched/PFSRVF/list.asp
.
Exercise 9-3
National Codes
With information provided in this chapter, complete the following:
1 
HCPCS is divided into two levels. List the names of the levels, in
order, and the level numbers:
a
_______________________________________________________________________
Level ____________
b
_______________________________________________________________________
Level ____________
2 
There are five groups of codes that are used by CMS for temporary
assignment until a definitive decision can be made about the correct
code assignment. What are the alphabetic letters of these five
groups of codes? ____________, ____________, ____________,
____________, and ____________
3 
Are all HCPCS modifiers numeric? ____________
4 
What alphabetic group of codes is used to reference drugs in the
HCPCS? ____________
5 
The term “route of administration” generally describes the
administration of drugs by methods other than _____________.
6 
What group of codes is used to reference durable medical
equipment in the National Codes? ____________________
Use
 to answer the following questions:
7 
What is the modifier for each of the following (
Fig. 9-7
)?
a 
New equipment ____________
b 
Lower left eyelid ____________
c 
The services of a physician who was a member
of a team that provided service ____________
8 
What is the route of administration of Carmustine (HCL) (
Fig. 9-9
)?
________________________
9 
What is the amount of Cefadyl for code J0710 (
Fig. 9-9
)?
_________________________________
10 
What is the J code for an injection of Carboplatin (
Fig. 9-9
)?
_________________________________
11 
What is the code available for a venous pressure clamp (
Fig. 9-6
)?
_________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 9, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 How many alphanumeric positions do Level II codes hold?
__________
2 What code grouping reports temporary codes assigned by CMS?
__________
3 What code group is used by State Medicaid agencies? __________
4 Where are Level II modifiers found in the HCPCS manual?
__________________________________________________
5 What name are J codes referred to in the Table of Drugs? __________
6 Which A code would you report for a surgical tray? __________
Chapter 9, part I, theory
Do not use your HCPCS manual for this part of the review.
1 HCPCS stands for
_____________________________________________ (five words).
2 What two levels or groups is HCPCS divided into?
Level I:
______________________________________________
Level II:
_____________________________________
3 Level III codes were known as
_____________________________________ (two words).
4 Level II codes are not used to report services provided to
______________________.
5 The index is in _______________________ order.
6 J codes refer to drugs only by their ________________ name.
7 Items billed before a signed and dated order has been received by
the supplier must be submitted with modifier _______.
8 Level II National Modifiers are found in the Introduction section of
the HCPCS and also in Appendix ____ of CPT.
9 What is produced each fall and lists all HCPCS and CPT codes?
____________________________________________________________________
(four words)
10 Medicare and other federal payers do not recognize ______ codes.
11 What HCPCS code letter is used to identify professional
procedures and services that would otherwise be coded with a CPT
code but no CPT codes have been established? ____________
12 _____________________________________________ (three words) is
equipment used by a patient with a chronic disabling condition.
13 Codes beginning with letters K, G, Q, S, and T are for
___________________ code assignment.
Using
 
Fig. 9-14
, identify the following:
 
FIGURE 9-14
Identify the heading, subheading, code range, and
HCPCS code.
14 ____________________________________________
15 ____________________________________________
16 ____________________________________________
17 ____________________________________________
a heading
b subheading
c HCPCS code
d code range
Using
 
Fig. 9-15
, identify the following.
 
FIGURE 9-15
Identify the main terms and subterms.
18 ____________________
19 ____________________
a main term
b subterm
Chapter 9, part II, practical
Using the index of the HCPCS manual, locate the code(s) following these
terms:
20 Enoxaparin sodium: ________________________
21 Cast, hand restoration: _____________________-
_____________________
22 Hydraulic patient lift: _______________________
23 Positioning seat: ___________________________
24 Speech assessment: _________________________-
_____________________
25 Whirlpool equipment: ______________________-
_____________________
26 Transportation, corneal tissue: _______________
27 Orthotic devices, Legg-Perthes: ______________-
_____________________
28 Contraceptive, cervical cap: _________________
29 Catheter, indwelling: ________________________-
_____________________
30 Dressing, foam: ________________________-
_____________________
31 Blood glucose test: ________________________
32 Monitor, blood pressure: ________________________
33 Oral methotrexate: ________________________
34 Bathtub chair: ________________________
35 Surgical ambulatory boot: ________________________
36 Defibrillator battery: ________________________
37 Digoxin injection: ________________________
38 Streptokinase injection: ________________________
39 Pulse generator: ________________________
40 Shoe inserts: ________________________-_____________________
41 Splint, ankle: ________________________-_____________________
Learning Objective Review answers are available in 
Appendix E
.
Chapter Review Parts I and II answers are available in the TEACH
Instructor Resources on Evolve, as well as within the “Chapter
Review” application on Evolve (at the discretion of the instructor).
CHAPTER 10
Modifiers
 
“As you develop your skills, you can move into dozens of different
areas of specialization. Pay close attention to the areas of your work
where you feel most inclined to excel and explore. You’re likely to be
very happy there!”
Jane A. Tuttle, CPC-I, CCS-P
Coding Education Endeavors
 
Westford, Massachusetts
CHAPTER TOPICS
CPT Modifiers
Modifier -
22
Modifier -
23
Modifier -
24
Modifier -
25
Modifier -
26
Modifier -
32
Modifier -
33
Modifier -
47
Modifier -
50
Modifier -
51
Modifier -
52
Modifier -
53
Modifier -
54
Modifier -
55
Modifier -
56
Modifier -
57
Modifier -
58
Modifier -
59
Modifier -
62
Modifier -
63
Modifier -
66
Modifier -
76
Modifier -
77
Modifier -
78
Modifier -
79
Modifier -
80
Modifier -
81
Modifier -
82
Modifier -
90
Modifier -
91
Modifier -
92
Modifier -
95
Modifier -
99
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Recognize modifiers.
2 
Understand the purpose of modifiers.
3 
Assign Increased Procedural Services modifier -22.
4 
Assign Unusual Anesthesia modifier -23.
5 
Assign Unrelated E/M Services by the Same Physician or Other
Qualified Health Care Professional During a Postoperative Period
modifier -24.
6 
Assign Significant Separately Identifiable E/M Service by the Same
Physician or Other Qualified Health Care Professional on the Same
Day of the Procedure or Other Service modifier -25.
7 
Assign Professional Component modifier -26.
8 
Assign Mandated Services modifier -32.
9 
Assign Preventive Services modifier -33.
10 
Assign Anesthesia by Surgeon modifier -47.
11 
Assign Bilateral Procedures modifier -50.
12 
Assign Multiple Procedures modifier -51.
13 
Assign Reduced Services modifier -52.
14 
Assign Discontinued Procedure modifier -53.
15 
Assign Surgical Care Only modifier -54.
16 
Assign Postoperative Management Only modifier -55.
17 
Assign Preoperative Management Only modifier -56.
18 
Assign Decision for Surgery modifier -57.
19 
Assign Staged or Related Procedure or Service by the Same
Physician or Other Qualified Health Care Professional During the
Postoperative Period modifier -58.
20 
Assign Distinct Procedural Service modifier -59.
21 
Assign Two Surgeons modifier -62.
22 
Assign Procedure Performed on Infants Less than 4 kg modifier
-63.
23 
Assign Surgical Team modifier -66.
24 
Assign Repeat Procedure or Service by Same Physician or Other
Qualified Health Care Professional modifier -76.
25 
Assign Repeat Procedure by Another Physician or Other Qualified
Health Care Professional modifier -77.
26 
Assign Unplanned Return to the Operating/Procedure Room by the
Same Physician or Other Qualified Health Care Professional
Following Initial Procedure for a Related Procedure During the
Postoperative Period modifier -78.
27 
Assign Unrelated Procedure or Service by the Same Physician or
Other Qualified Health Care Professional During the Postoperative
Period modifier -79.
28 
Assign Assistant Surgeon modifier -80.
29 
Assign Minimum Assistant Surgeon modifier -81.
30 
Assign Assistant Surgeon (When Qualified Resident Surgeon Not
Available) modifier -82.
31 
Assign Reference (Outside) Laboratory modifier -90.
32 
Assign Repeat Clinical Diagnostic Laboratory Test modifier -91.
33 
Assign Alternative Laboratory Platform Testing modifier -92.
34 
Assign Multiple Modifiers modifier -99.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
CPT modifiers
Modifiers inform third-party payers of circumstances that may affect
the way payment is made. 
Appendix A
 of the CPT manual lists the
full description for all modifiers and the circumstances for their use.
Modifiers indicate the following types of information:
■
 
Altered service
Service greater than usually required
Unusual circumstances
Part of a service
Discontinued services
■
 
Bilateral procedure
■
 
Multiple procedures
■
 
Professional part of the service/procedure only
■
 
More than one physician/surgeon
Modifiers complete the story for insurance carriers to determine
reimbursement. Consider using a modifier when the CPT code does
not complete the story.
 
CODING SHOT
For the purposes of this text, when there are multiple CPT modifiers
assigned to one code, list the modifiers from highest to lowest, for
example, -78-50.
The CPT modifiers are shown in 
Fig. 10-1
.
 
FIGURE 10–1
CPT modifiers.
-22, increased procedural services
Modifier -22 indicates that the service was greater than usual and
required increased physician work above and beyond normal. A
special report must accompany the use of modifier -22 to explain how
the service was greater. Documentation should indicate the time it
usually takes to perform the service and the significant increase in that
time due to documented factors. For example, if it normally takes 45
minutes to provide the service, but because of the extent and
complications 90 minutes was required. Modifier -22 is reported with
surgical codes. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the
description of this modifier.
The use of modifier -22 indicates that the service provided was
significantly greater than the service described in the CPT code. A few
additional minutes spent on a procedure does not warrant the use of
this modifier. The medical record must contain documentation that
substantiates that the service was unusual in some way, such as
statements about the increased risk to the patient, the difficulty of the
procedure, excessive blood loss, or other statements to indicate the
occurrence of an unusually difficult situation. Examples include:
■
 
Excessive blood loss.
■
 
Extensive well-documented adhesions in abdominal surgery.
■
 
Trauma extensive enough to complicate the procedure and the
complication is not reported separately.
■
 
Other pathologies, tumors, malformations that directly interfere
with the procedure but are not reported separately.
■
 
The service rendered was significantly more complex than described
for the code description.
Modifier -22 is overused, so it comes under particularly close
scrutiny by third-party payers, especially as there is usually a
payment increase of 20% to 30% for services that qualify for the use of
modifier -22. When reporting modifier -22, be sure that you have the
documentation to support the claim. When the third-party payer
receives a claim that includes a service to which modifier -22 has been
added, the claim is sent to an individual who reviews the claim.
Appropriate documentation must, therefore, accompany the claim—
an operative report, a pathology report, office notes, hospital chart
notes, and so forth.
When assigning modifier -22, additional charges are added based
on the increase in physician work, and the documentation that
supports the higher charge is contained in the medical record.
Avoid routine use of modifier -22, as the modifier should be
reported only when a surgeon provides a service that is greater than
usually required and a secondary code that would claim the
additional work cannot be reported. The use of specialized technology
(e.g., laparoscope or laser) does not automatically qualify for use of
modifier -22. Abuse of the modifier will attract unwanted scrutiny.
Repeated misuse could trigger an audit.
CMS develops rules to promote correct coding methods and to
control improper coding leading to inappropriate payment. CMS
develops coding policies based on the CPT manual, national and local
policies, coding guidelines developed by national societies, analysis of
standard medical and surgical practices, and a review of current
coding practices. These rules are only for beneficiaries of government
programs, such as Medicare, but many third-party payers have
adopted many of the guidelines. Within this text, reference will be
made to the CMS rules as follows:
CMS RULES
The Medicare Claims Processing Manual 100-04, 
Chapter 12
, 20.4.6
(
www.cms.gov/manuals/downloads/clm104c12.pdf
) states that the
fees for services represent the average work effort and practice
expenses required to provide a service. For any given procedure
code, there could be a typical range of work effort and practice
expense required to provide the service. Thus, carriers may increase
or decrease the payment for a service only under very unusual
circumstances based upon review of medical records and other
supporting documentation.
Modifier -22 is valid for codes with global periods of 0, 10, or 90
days. Modifier -22 is not valid for “XXX” global period indicators,
which includes E/M, radiology, laboratory, pathology, and most
medicine codes.
 
QUICK CHECK 10-1
1. 
According to The Medicare Claims Processing Manual 100-04,
Chapter 12
, 20.6, Updating Factor for Fee Schedule Services
(
www.cms.gov/manuals/downloads/clm104c12.pdf
), claims
processing contractors must maintain at least
______________________ full calendar years of fee schedules and
related pricing data, regardless of the number of updates or pricing
periods.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
-23, unusual anesthesia
Modifier -23 is used by an anesthesiologist to indicate a service for
which general anesthesia was used when normally the anesthesia
would have been local or regional. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT
manual and read the description of this modifier.
This modifier can only be assigned with codes in the Anesthesia
section (00100-01999) by an anesthesiologist/nurse anesthetist. This
modifier is added to the primary procedure that would not usually
require general anesthesia services such as 62270 (Spinal puncture,
lumbar, diagnostic). The anesthesia code for 62270 is 00635
(Anesthesia for procedures in the lumbar region; diagnostic or
therapeutic lumbar puncture). Code 00635-23 indicates that someone
other than the anesthesiologist is performing the lumbar puncture and
that this procedure usually does not require anesthesia services. Some
payers may require documentation to support the need for anesthesia
services.
 
QUICK CHECK 10-2
1. 
Which of the following may be an example of “unusual anesthesia”
circumstances?
a. 
Simple open wound repair on the face of a 2-
year-old who is unable to sit still for the repair
b. 
Pelvic exam on a developmentally challenged
woman who is unable to cooperate
c. 
Cast application for fracture care of a combative
Alzheimer’s patient
d. 
All of the above
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
-24, unrelated evaluation and management
service by the same physician or other
qualified health care professional during a
postoperative period
Modifier -24 is used only with E/M codes. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the
CPT manual and read the description of this modifier.
Modifier -24 reports services that were performed during a
postoperative period but were unrelated to recovery from the surgical
procedure. Surgical procedures have a package of services, such as
preoperative, procedure (intraoperative), and normal follow-up care.
If an E/M service unrelated to the surgical procedure is provided to a
patient during the postoperative period, the third-party payer would
think that the service was part of the surgical package and deny
payment. Modifier -24 is added to indicate that the E/M service was
not part of the surgical package (global period) but was an unrelated
service. The postoperative period of a major surgical procedure is
usually 90 days; a minor surgery, 10 days. Payment for the surgical
procedure includes postoperative care of the patient during these
periods.
You can also use modifier -24 with the General Ophthalmological
Service codes 92002-92014 for eye evaluations, even though these
codes are located in the Medicine section. Ophthalmologists report
new and established medical examinations using 92002-92014.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -24 requests payment for an unassociated E/M within a
global period. The diagnosis code would indicate that the reason for
the service was unrelated to the surgical procedure.
For example, a male patient is within the 10-day global period for
an incision and drainage of a skin abscess. The patient presents to the
physician’s office for a wound check and also to ask the physician to
evaluate a mole on his chest that has changed color. The postoperative
visit is reported with 99024 (no charge code), and the evaluation of the
mole is reported with 9921X-24 to indicate a medically necessary E/M
service unrelated to the incision and drainage of the skin abscess. The
diagnosis code reported with the E/M service for the mole would
indicate the medical necessity of the service, such as D23.5 for a
benign neoplasm of the skin of the chest wall.
-25, significant separately identifiable e/m
service by the same physician or other
qualified health care professional on the same
day of the procedure or other service
Modifier -25 is used to report an E/M service on a day when another
service was provided to the patient by the same individual. Turn to
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
CMS RULES
If reporting services for a Medicare patient, modifier -25 could be
added to an E/M code when a decision for surgery was made on the
same day as a procedure with a global surgical package of 0-10 days
or procedures not covered by global surgery rules (global indicator of
XXX) if the E/M service is not associated with the decision to perform
a minor surgical procedure whether the patient is a new or
established patient. Modifier -57 would be added to an E/M code
when the service resulted in a decision for surgery on the day before
or the day of a procedure with a global surgical package of 90 days.
To assign modifier -25 correctly, there must be a medical necessity
to provide a separate, additional E/M service on the same day a
procedure was performed or another service was provided. The
medical necessity for this additional E/M service must be documented
in the patient’s medical record. If you do not add modifier -25 to the
additional E/M code for service on the day of a procedure, the third-
party payer would disallow the charge because it would be thought to
be the evaluation/management portion of the procedure. By adding
modifier -25, you are stating that the service was separate from the
procedure or original service. Use of modifier -25 increases the
potential of receiving payment for the service. For example, a
physician provided a dialysis service to a hospital inpatient. In
addition, the physician provided a separate discharge service (not
related to the dialysis). You would report the dialysis service
(procedure) and also report the inpatient service (discharge), adding
the modifier -25 to the discharge service.
The modifier can also be assigned when additional E/M services are
provided on the same day to the same patient. For example, if a
patient came into the office for a visit early in the day and then later in
the day returned for a separate unrelated E/M service. You report both
services using E/M codes and add modifier -25 to the second E/M
code. If the services were for the same related condition as seen in the
earlier service, documentation for both services would be considered
to assign only one E/M code for that day.
Let’s review a couple other examples of the use of modifier -25. A
patient presents for repair of a laceration (12042, intermediate
laceration repair) and the questions asked by the physician were
related only to the laceration repair. In this case, the E/M service is
included in the laceration repair service and not reported separately.
However, if the physician documented the patient had elevated blood
pressure and a history of hypertension and the physician evaluated
and treated the hypertensive condition, modifier -25 would be added
to the E/M code. Diagnosis code I10/401.X (hypertension) would be
reported as the diagnosis for the E/M service. The laceration repair
would have a trauma diagnosis for open wound, and as such, the
diagnosis code would support the medical necessity for the laceration
repair. In this example, both the E/M service (with -25) and the
laceration repair are reported with diagnosis codes that indicate the
medical necessity of both services.
-26, professional component
Modifier -26 is used to designate a physician (professional)
component of procedures that have a professional and technical
component, such as the interpretation of ultrasounds or x-rays. Turn
to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
Modifier -26 is usually used with radiology service because
radiology services often have two components—professional
component and technical component. An example of the technical
component is an independent radiology facility that takes the x-rays
(technical component) and sends them to a private radiologist who
reads the x-rays and writes a report of the findings (professional
component). The physician’s services would be reported with
modifier -26 added to the code for the x-ray, indicating that only the
professional component of the x-ray service was provided, as in the
following:
A 35-year-old white female was seen in the emergency department
following a fall from a horse. She complained of pain in her right
clavicle and shoulder. The emergency physician ordered a complete x-
ray of the clavicle. The radiologist provided the report with a
diagnosis of a fractured clavicle. The physician component of the x-
ray for the radiologist would be reported with 73000-26.
EXERCISE 10-1
Modifiers -22 through -26
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
The surgeon performed a repair of an enterocele using an abdominal
approach (57270) on a morbidly obese patient, and because of the
patient’s obesity, the procedure took a significant amount of
additional time to perform (50 minutes added to the normal time
usually required).
CPT Code and Modifier: ____________________
2 
During a radical orchiectomy with abdominal exploration for an
extensive primary, malignant neoplasm (54535) of the left
descended testis, the patient began to hemorrhage (a complication).
After considerable time and effort, which extended the surgery by
60 minutes, the hemorrhage was controlled.
CPT Code and Modifier: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
3 
An extremely anxious and combative elderly man presented to the
outpatient same-day surgery unit for a gastroscopy due to
hematemesis and suspected peptic ulcer. The patient was unable to
cooperate. The physician determined that, because of the patient’s
advanced Alzheimer’s, general anesthesia during this procedure,
which usually does not require anesthesia, was the best approach to
use with the patient. What modifier would the anesthesiologist
report when reporting this service?
Modifier: ____________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________,
________________
4 
Dr. Foster admitted a patient to a skilled nursing facility because of
the patient’s advanced dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease (during
the global period for a herniorrhaphy that Dr. Foster performed).
What modifier would be added to the admission service?
Modifier: ____________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
5 
A patient came to the office twice in one day to see the same
physician for unrelated problems. What modifier would be added
to the code for the second office visit?
Modifier: ____________
6 
A 60-year-old female patient is referred to a radiology laboratory by
her general physician. The laboratory takes the x-rays requested
and sends them on to a radiologist to interpret and to develop the
written report that is sent to the general physician. If you were
coding for the radiologist, what modifier would you add to indicate
the service provided by the radiologist?
Modifier: ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
-32, mandated services
Modifier -32 indicates a service that is required by some third-party
entity. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the
description of this modifier.
This modifier is 
not
 used to report a second opinion requested by a
patient, a family member, or another physician. Modifier -32 is
reported only when a service is mandated. For example, the police
require a suspected rape or abuse victim to have certain tests. These
are mandated services to which modifier -32 would be added.
Another common use of modifier -32 is to indicate that a third-party
payer or Workers’ Compensation mandated a physical examination of
a covered patient. The third-party payer usually waives the deductible
and copayment for the patient and usually pays 100% of these
mandated services.
-33, preventive service
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) requires
health insurance coverage of preventive services and immunizations
without cost. US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) grades
preventive services:
Grade A: High certainty that the net benefit is substantial
Grade B: High certainty that the net benefit is moderate or there is a
moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial
Example of service:
■
 
Grade A
■
 
Topic: Blood pressure screening
■
 
Description: The USPSTF recommends screening for high blood
pressure in adults aged 18 and older.
Task Force list located at:
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspsabrecs.htm
-47, anesthesia by surgeon
Modifier -47 is used to report a surgical procedure in which the
surgeon administered regional or general anesthesia to the patient.
Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of
this modifier.
There are times, although they occur infrequently, when a physician
acts as both the anesthesiologist and the surgeon. For example, a
closed reduction of a mandibular fracture performed in the office
under intravenous sedation/general anesthesia would be reported
with 21451 for the procedure and 21451-47 as a separate line item for
the anesthesia/sedation.
CMS RULES
Medicare does not reimburse the surgeon for anesthesia service when
he/she is the performing surgeon.
If the third-party payer allowed payment for modifier -47, payment
would be made based on the 
time
 spent administering the anesthetic.
The surgeon acting as an anesthesiologist would report modifier -47
with the surgery code. Modifier -47 is added only to surgery codes
and is never added to anesthesia codes.
-50, bilateral procedures
If the same procedure is performed on a mirror-image organ of the
body (such as right and left kidneys), modifier -50, indicating a
bilateral procedure, would be reported. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the
CPT manual and read the description of this modifier.
For example, an arthroplasty (total knee replacement, 27447 and
27447-50) for both left and right knees at the same operative session
would be reported using the modifier -50.
Another example in which the same services may be performed on
two sides would be a bilateral breast procedure (e.g., bilateral, simple
complete mastectomy, 19303 and 19303-50).
It is very important to determine how the third-party payer wants
bilateral procedures submitted on the claim form, on a single line or
multiple lines. One payer may require two codes to be displayed for
the bilateral procedure (such as 27447 and 27447-50) for which they
would reimburse 100% for the first code and 50% for the second code.
Another payer may require that bilateral procedures be reported with
only one code (27447-50) and would reimburse 150% based on that
one code with modifier -50 representing two
 
services. Still other
payers want the service reported as 27447-RT and 27447-LT.
CMS RULES
Medicare does not accept two line items to describe a bilateral
procedure. Medicare rules direct the coder to use one line with
modifier -50 and 1 unit of service. For example, submit 27447-50
rather than 27447, 27447-50.
Be sure to find out whether your third-party payer wants the
surgical code to be used once with the modifier (code plus modifier
-50) or used twice (code alone and code plus modifier -50) or whether
the procedure should be listed twice.
 
CAUTION 
Some CPT codes are for bilateral procedures and do not require a bilateral
modifier. For example, 27395 is for bilateral lengthening of the hamstring
tendon. It would be incorrect to place a bilateral modifier on 27395. Code
92020 (gonioscopy) is also a bilateral procedure and use of modifier -50
would be inappropriate.
-51, multiple procedures
During any given operative session, more than one procedure may be
performed. This is referred to as “multiple procedures” and is
indicated by modifier -51. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and
read the description of this modifier.
Assign modifier -51 when multiple procedures, other than the E/M
services, are performed on the same day or at the same session by the
same provider. When reporting multiple surgeries, the primary
procedure (the procedure with the highest relative value unit) should
be listed first on the claim.
For example, a benign skin lesion is excised from a patient’s chest
(diameter over 4.0 cm) and closure of the defect using layered closure.
The service is reported with 
11406
 (Excision, benign lesion including
margins, except skin tag [unless listed elsewhere], trunk, arms or legs;
excised diameter over 4.0 cm) and 
12032-51
 (Layer closure of wounds
of scalp, axillae, trunk and/or extremities [excluding hands and feet];
2.6 cm to 7.5 cm).
CMS RULES
After the first eligible procedure is reimbursed at 100% of Medicare’s
allowance, the remaining procedures are reimbursed at 50% up to
four additional procedures. No documentation is required. After the
fifth procedure, the procedures will be considered ‘by report’ and
documentation is then required.
(Medicare Claims Processing Manual, 
Chapter 12
, 40.6.
(
www.cms.gov/manuals/downloads/clm104c12.pdf
))
You have to be careful when coding multiple procedures because
CPT codes include many different procedures bundled together in one
code. For example, code 58200 is a total abdominal hysterectomy, but
it also includes a partial vaginectomy (removal of the vagina) with
para-aortic and pelvic lymph node sampling, with or without removal
of tube(s), and with or without removal of ovary(ies). It would be
incorrect to report each service separately because they are included
(bundled) in the description for code 58200. Listing the subsequent
procedures 
separately (unbundling) is considered fraud by a third-
party payer. Unbundling is assigning multiple codes when one code
would fully describe the service or procedure. The assigning of
multiple codes results in increased reimbursement.
 
QUICK CHECK 10-3
1. 
What is the symbol in the CPT manual that indicates modifier -51
should not be used? ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
However, if one code does not describe all of the procedures
performed, and the secondary procedure is not considered a minor
procedure that is incidental to the major procedure (and therefore
bundled into the major procedure), each additional procedure may be
reported by using the multiple procedure modifier (-51). For example,
a patient has a laminectomy with lumbar disc removal (for a herniated
disc), reported with 63030. The patient also has an arthrodesis
(stabilization of the area where the disc was removed), reported with
22612. Both services would be reported, and modifier -51 would be
added to the lesser of the two services.
There are three significant times when multiple procedures are
reported:
1. 
Same Operation, Different Site
2. 
Multiple Operation(s), Same Operative Session
3. 
Procedure Performed Multiple Times
Same operation, different site. 
Multiple procedures are reported using modifier -51 when the same
procedure is performed on different sites. For example, a patient has
an excision of a 1.5-cm benign lesion from the forearm and at the same
time has an excision of a 3-cm benign lesion from the neck. In this
case, the reporting would be 11423 for the 3-cm lesion and 11402-51
for the 1.5-cm lesion. List the most resource-intensive (expensive)
procedure first, without a modifier.
Example
The payer reimburses $175.96 for 11423 and $140.54 for 11402. The
difference in reimbursement is significant based on the order of the
codes.
11423, 11402-51 = $175.96 + $70.27 (50% of $140.54) payment is
$246.23
11402, 11423-50 = $140.54 + $87.98 (50% of $175.96) payment is
$228.52
The difference in reimbursement is $17.71 for submission of just
these two services in an incorrect order.
Multiple operation(s), same operative session. 
Multiple procedures (-51) are also reported when more than one
procedure is performed during the same operative session.
The primary procedure during the surgical session would be paid at
the full fee, the second procedure during the same session would
usually be paid at 50% of the fee, and the third procedure would
usually be paid at 25% of the fee. Again, when you are coding
procedures for payment, it is important that you put the most
resource-intensive procedure first, without a modifier, and then list
the subsequent procedures in order of complexity, remembering to
use the -51 modifier for all subsequent procedures. This process of
assigning the -51 modifier helps to ensure that optimal reimbursement
occurs.
Procedure performed multiple times. 
Multiple procedures are also reported when the same procedure code
identifies a service performed more than once during a single
operative session. There are two ways to report procedures performed
multiple times, depending on the requirements of the third-party
payer. One way is to use the code number only once but to list the
number of times it is performed (number of units). For example, if a
patient had a repair of two flexor tendons of the leg, you would report
27658 × 2 units. Units are used because the code description states
“each” tendon, and two tendons were repaired. The other way to code
this would be to list 27658 once without a modifier and again with
modifier -51 (i.e., 27658-51).
Third-party payers require submission of codes in various formats
with various modifiers. HCPCS (Healthcare Common Procedure
Coding System) modifiers indicate the right side (-RT) and left side (-
LT) and the system also has modifiers that indicate the digits of the
foot and hand:
CMS RULES
For all Medicare claims, the modifiers specifying the digit must be
reported.
You will find some of the more common HCPCS modifiers on the
front inside cover of the Professional Edition of the CPT manual and
in 
Appendix A
 of the CPT manual. HCPCS modifiers add specificity
and, for that reason, are required by many payers.
 
CODING SHOT
For the purposes of this text, HCPCS modifiers are listed in ascending
alphabetic order when added to a code. For example, -AK-GT. If there
are also CPT modifiers added to the code, list the CPT modifiers first
(highest to lowest) followed by the HCPCS modifiers (ascending
alphabetic order).
All of the variations in format can be a bit confusing when you
begin coding, so let’s stop here for a moment and review a few of the
more common configurations that affect -50, -51, and reporting of
units (times symbol).
Examples
Modifier -50 (bilateral)
The physician performs a surgical sinus endoscopy with total
ethmoidectomy, 31255, on the left and right ethmoid sinuses
(bilateral).
1. 
Using modifier -50, the service would be usually reported:
31255 and 31255-50
2. 
Using the HCPCS modifiers for sides (-LT, left side, and -RT, right
side), the service would be reported:
31255-LT and 31255-RT
3. 
Using the one-line format, the service would be reported:
31255-50
The most specific method of reporting is the second format, as it
indicates not only the number of procedures, but also the side of the
body.
Modifier -51 (multiple)
The physician percutaneously repairs a distal phalangeal fracture of
the second and third fingers of the left hand, with skeletal fixation
(26756).
1. 
Using modifier -51, the service would be reported:
26756 and 26756-51
2. 
Using the HCPCS modifiers for fingers (-F1, left hand, second digit,
and F2, left hand, third digit), the service would be reported:
26756-F1 and 26756-F2
3. 
Using the times symbol, the service would be reported:
26756 × 2
You can see that the most specific method of reporting is again the
second format, as it indicates the procedure, hand, and digit.
The use of the times symbol is another area of confusion when you
first begin coding.
Times symbol (×)
The physician performs a skin biopsy on five skin lesions.
11100 (first lesion) and 11101 × 4 (second through fifth lesions)
Look for the word 
“each”
 in the code description as a hint to use
the times symbol. The code description for 11101 states “
each
separate/additional lesion
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
,” with the “each” being the hint to use
the times symbol.
Another example of the use of the times symbol is in pathology
codes because some payers want multiple specimens reported in
units. For example, the pathologist examines three tissue specimens.
88302 (first specimen) and 88302 × 2 (second and third specimens)
The number of units is placed in Block 24G (Units) on the CMS-
1500 form.
 
CAUTION 
Modifier -51 is not used with add-on codes that specify “each
additional.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
”
 
CODING SHOT
As always, be aware that the payers dictate how providers are to
submit for payment of services. For example, some payers may not
want providers to submit modifier -51 for the same operation
performed on different sites but instead, modifier -59 (Distinct
Procedural Service). Usually, however, the standard is to require -51
for the three significant times when multiple procedures are
provided.
TOOLBOX 10-1
 
Carter was brought to the pediatrician for DTaP and MMR
vaccinations and an annual school physical prior to beginning first
grade. During the examination, the physician provided counseling to
the mother regarding the vaccinations. The physician also identified a
1-cm mole on Carter’s left thigh and after discussion and consent
from the mother, excised the lesion. The pathology report later
indicated benign tissue.
Reporting would be:
MMR: 90707 ($35), 90460 ($25)
DTaP: 90700 ($20), 90461 ($12)
Preventative examination: 99383 ($72)
Lesion excision: 11401 ($113)
Questions
1. 
In what order would you submit these codes?
_______________________________
2. 
Are any modifiers necessary on these codes?
_______________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
-52, reduced services
Modifier -52 is used to indicate that a service was provided but was
reduced in comparison to the full description of the service. Turn to
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
An example of a circumstance in which modifier -52 would be
reported is a surgical procedure for the removal of an abdominal
carcinoma in which the patient was anesthetized and the excision
begun but then was terminated by the physician because the
metastasis was too far advanced. When modifier -52 is reported,
additional documentation, such as operative reports and/or physician
explanation of the reason for the reduced service, will speed the
reimbursement process, as the third-party payer usually wants to
know the reason for the reduction before making payment.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -52 may or may not affect reimbursement. Some payers
decrease the payment if the procedure was not completed, and others
pay in full once anesthesia has been administered to the patient.
Example
A physician performed a hammer toe correction (28285) but the
tendon was already split (the surgeon usually has to perform this),
thereby decreasing the work necessary by the surgeon. In this case,
only a portion of the usual procedure was completed. The service
would be reported with 28285 with modifier -52.
Example
The operative report indicates: “Excision of ischial pressure ulcer,
without ostectomy.” Assign 15946 (Excision, ischial pressure ulcer,
with ostectomy) with modifier -52. Modifier -52 indicates that all the
procedure components were not entirely completed because the code
indicated “with ostectomy” and the operative reported stated
“without ostectomy.”
CMS RULES
Do not assign modifier -52 with E/M services. Medicare does not
recognize the modifier for this purpose, according to the Medicare
Carriers Manual Section 15501. Instead, use unspecified E/M code
94999 and submit documentation that explains why less than the
normal service was completed.
EXERCISE 10-2
Modifiers -32 through -52
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following using
the two code format for codes to which you add -50 or -51:
1 
Workers’ Compensation referred a patient to a physician for a
mandatory examination to determine the legitimacy of a claim
(insurance certification). What modifier would be added to the code
for the examination service?
Modifier: ____________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Dr. Ramus administers regional anesthesia by intravenous injection
(also known as a Bier block) for a surgical procedure on the
patient’s lower arm. Dr. Ramus then performs the surgical
procedure. What modifier would be added to the surgical code?
Modifier: ____________
3 
A patient underwent bilateral carpal tunnel surgery. When you
assign a code, what modifier would you be certain to use?
Modifier: ____________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
Destruction of primary, malignant lesion of neck, 4 cm in diameter
(fee schedule: 17274, $142.43), with destruction of primary,
malignant lesion of arm, 4 cm in diameter (fee schedule: 17264,
$78.40).
CPT Codes and Modifier: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
5 
Bilateral supratentorial burr holes (61154) for chronic, subdural
hematomas (nontraumatic).
CPT Codes and Modifier: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
Treatment of two tarsal bone fractures, without manipulation (each
28450).
CPT Codes and Modifier: ____________________,
____________________
7 
What is the code for a bilateral total knee replacement
(arthroplasty)?
CPT Codes and Modifier: ____________________,
____________________
8 
Which modifier describes a procedure that was reduced at the
direction of the physician?
Modifier: ____________
For Questions 9 and 10, list the three formats that may be required
by third-party payers:
9 
What are the codes for bilateral arthrotomy of the elbows (24006)?
One code listed twice with CPT modifier:
____________________, ____________________
One code listed once with CPT modifier:
____________________
One code listed twice with HCPCS modifiers:
____________________, ____________________
10 
The code for a radical mastectomy is 19305. List three ways the
bilateral modifier could be used to indicate that a bilateral
procedure was performed, depending on the third-party payer’s
preferences.
One code listed twice with CPT modifier:
____________________, ____________________
One code listed once with CPT modifier:
____________________
One code listed twice with HCPCS modifiers:
____________________, ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
-53, discontinued procedure
Modifier -52 describes circumstances in which services were reduced
at the direction of the physician, whereas modifier -53 describes
circumstances in which a procedure was stopped because of the
patient’s status. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the
description of this modifier.
An example of the correct assignment of modifier -53 would be
when a patient had received anesthesia and the procedure was
underway. The patient then developed arrhythmia that could not be
controlled. The physician discontinued the procedure because of the
risk continuation presented to the patient. The code for the surgical
procedure would be reported along with modifier -53 to indicate that
although the procedure was begun, it was discontinued due to the
patient’s status. The key to proper reporting of modifier -53 is that the
patient has been prepared for surgery, anesthetized, and the surgeon
discontinued the procedure.
Modifier -53 is 
not
 used to report services:
■
 
When the patient cancels the procedure
■
 
With E/M codes
■
 
With any code that is based on time (e.g., critical care codes)
Attach a cover note and state the percentage of the procedure that
was completed and why the procedure had to be stopped. For
example, “Only 50% of procedure was completed. The procedure was
stopped because patient developed arrhythmia that could not be
controlled.”
CMS RULES
Modifier -53 should be used to report a failed or terminated
colonoscopy. When a colonoscopy is attempted, but not completed, it
should not be reported as a sigmoidoscopy but as discontinued
colonoscopy procedure 45378-53.
Modifiers -54, -55, and -56
There may be times when a surgeon performs only the surgery
(modifier -54) and requests another physician to perform the
preoperative evaluation (modifier -56) and/or the postoperative care
(modifier -55). When reporting his or her own individual services,
each physician would use the same procedure code for the surgery,
letting the modifier indicate to the third-party payer the part of the
surgical package that each personally performed.
Example
19303
Mastectomy, simple, complete
19303-54
Mastectomy, simple, complete, 
surgery
 (intraoperative) only
19303-56
Mastectomy, simple, complete, 
preoperative
 evaluation only
19303-55
Mastectomy, simple, complete, 
postoperative
 care only
-54, surgical care only
Modifier -54 indicates the surgical care portion of a surgical procedure
(intraoperative). Use modifier -54 only with codes from the Surgery
section (10021-69990). Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and
read the description of this modifier.
Modifier -54 is used correctly only when there has been a 
transfer
 of
responsibility for care from one physician to another. This transfer
takes place by means of a transfer order that is signed by both
physicians and kept in the patient’s medical record. Modifier -54 is not
used for minor surgical procedures but for major procedures that
involve follow-up care as a part of the service of the surgery (surgery
package). Although third-party payers vary, the payment for only the
surgical procedure is usually about 70% of the total payment for the
procedure, with 10% for the physician who provides the preoperative
service, and 20% for the physician who provides the postoperative
care.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -54 usually results in reimbursement to the surgeon for the
intraoperative percentage of the global package payment. However,
some payers also include the preoperative service as a part of the
intraoperative care portion. In these cases, you would submit a
statement to indicate the preoperative service was provided by
another physician.
-55, postoperative management only
Another part of a surgical package is the postoperative care. The
amount of postoperative care that is considered part of a surgery
varies according to the complexity of the surgery, with 0, 10, or 90
days being the most commonly used number of postoperative days.
Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of
this modifier.
Modifier -55 is used only for services provided to the patient after
discharge from the hospital. To report services by another physician
provided while the patient is still in the hospital, use E/M codes
(99231-99233, subsequent hospital care) because the payment to the
operating physician (70%) assumes that the operating physician
provides the care until the patient is discharged from the hospital.
You report the postoperative services by adding modifier -55 to the
surgical code. For example, a patient had a nephrolithotomy (calculus
removed from kidney), reported with 50060, and then the operating
physician transferred to a second physician the postoperative care
after the patient’s discharge from the hospital. The operating
physician would report services using 50060-54, and the physician
providing the postoperative care would report 50060-55, with the date
of the surgery. The claim is not submitted until after the first
postoperative office visit. The physicians use the same surgery code
(50060). In this way, the third-party payer knows that the two
physicians are splitting the care of the patient into surgical care and
postoperative care after discharge.
Modifier -55 should result in reimbursement of the postoperative
percentage for the global package. This percentage is based on how
many days had passed after the operation before the care was
transferred from the first physician to the second physician. Care must
be officially transferred from the physician providing the surgical care
to the physician providing the postoperative care by way of a transfer
order that is kept in the medical record.
When different physicians in a group practice participate in the care
of a patient, the group reports the entire global package (no modifier).
The physician who performs the surgery is indicated on the claim as
the performing physician.
-56, preoperative management only
The third part of a surgical service is the preoperative care. If a
physician provides only the preoperative management to a patient in
preparation for surgery, the service is reported with modifier -56
added to the surgical code. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual
and read the description of this modifier.
Before a patient undergoes surgery, a physical examination is
performed to determine whether the patient is physically able to
withstand the procedure. This examination is the preoperative
workup or preop. When one physician performs the preoperative
workup and another physician performs the surgery, both physicians
report the services using the surgical procedure code with the correct
modifier. For example, in preparation for a nephrolithotomy, the
patient’s local physician performs the preoperative care (50060-56), an
itinerate (visiting) surgeon performs the surgery (50060-54), and the
local physician performs the postoperative care (50060-55).
CMS RULES
Modifier -56 is never used for services reported to Medicare, as
Medicare considers the preoperative service to be part of the surgery
and bundles the payment into the surgical payment.
-57, decision for surgery
Modifier -57 is reported with an E/M code to indicate the day the
decision to perform a major surgery was made. Turn to 
Appendix A
in the CPT manual and read the description of this modifier.
Modifier -57 can be reported not only with E/M codes (99201-99499)
to indicate the initial decision to perform a procedure or service but
also with the ophthalmologic codes (92002-92014) located in the
Medicine section. Modifier -57 requests payment for an E/M service
outside of the global package for a major procedure when the decision
to perform the surgery was made during the E/M service.
At the present time, not all modifiers are recognized by all third-
party payers. Some third-party payers have agreed to pay a physician
separately from the surgical package for the initial evaluation of a
condition during which the decision to perform surgery was made.
Modifier -57 is used to let the payer know that payment for this initial
evaluation should be made in addition to payment for surgery.
E/M services provided the 
day before
 or the 
day of
 a major surgery
are included in the global package. There are some exceptions, such as
when the service is the patient’s initial visit to the physician. To
receive payment for these initial visits, modifier -57 is reported to
indicate the decision for surgery was made the day before or the day
of the 
major
 procedure and modifier -25 is used to indicate the day of
a 
minor
 procedure.
 
CAUTION 
Don’t make the all too common mistake of adding -57 to codes from the
Surgery section. Modifier -57 is never added to surgical codes; rather, it is
added only to E/M codes.
 
CODING SHOT
Note that the description of modifier -57 does not indicate whether
the decided-upon procedure is diagnostic or therapeutic, minor or
major. These guidelines are established by the third-party payers.
CMS RULES
Medicare states that the carrier is to pay for an E/M service on the day
of or on the day before a procedure with a 90-day global surgical
period if the physician uses CPT modifier -57. Without modifier -57
the service will not be paid.
-58, staged or related procedure or service by
the same physician or other qualified health
care professional during the postoperative
period
Modifier -58 notifies the payer that a subsequent surgery was planned
or staged at the time of the first surgery. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the
CPT manual and read the description of this modifier.
The procedure must have been intended to include the original
procedure plus one or more subsequent procedures. For example,
multiple skin grafts are often done in stages to allow adequate healing
time between procedures. The modifier is added to the subsequent
submissions of the code when the second or related service is
performed during the global period to inform the third-party payer
that the service was staged. Modifier -58 can also be used if a
therapeutic procedure is performed because of the findings of a
diagnostic procedure. For example, a patient may have a surgical
breast biopsy, and if the pathology report indicates that the specimen
is malignant, the patient may elect to have an immediate radical
mastectomy. The mastectomy may be performed during the
postoperative period of the biopsy. Modifier -58 indicates to the third-
party payer that the second surgery was therapeutic treatment that
followed the original diagnostic procedure, and full payment would
usually be made for the mastectomy. A new postoperative period
would start after the mastectomy, and any postoperative care
provided to the patient would be part of the surgical package for the
mastectomy.
 
CAUTION 
There are some codes that include multiple sessions in the code description.
For example, 67141 and 67145 include “1 or more sessions” in the code
description. Modifier -58 is not appropriate with these multiple session
codes.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -58 requests full payment for a subsequent procedure that
may have been planned in follow-up, at the time of the first surgery,
or performed as a more extensive procedure subsequent to the first
surgery. A new global period begins with each subsequent procedure
modified with -58.
Example
A lesion was excised and determined to be malignant. The patient
was returned to the operating room a few days later for a re-excision
of the malignancy. Report the re-excision with modifier -58 because
the second procedure was performed within the global period of the
first procedure and related to the first procedure.
Example
A patient required a toe amputation due to gangrene. On follow-
up, the surgeon determined the patient requires further amputation,
this time of his entire foot because the original procedure did not
completely remove the gangrenous tissue. If the second amputation
occurs within the postoperative period of the first amputation, the
second amputation would be reported with modifier -58 as it is
related to the first procedure.
-59, distinct procedural service
Modifier -59 is reported to indicate that services that are usually
bundled into one payment were provided as separate services. Turn
to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
As the code description notes, modifier -59 is used to identify the
following:
■
 
Different session
■
 
Different procedure or surgery
■
 
Different site or organ system
■
 
Separate incision/excision
■
 
Separate lesion
■
 
Separate injury or area of injury in extensive injuries
Modifier -59 is reported with codes from all sections of the CPT
manual except E/M codes.
CMS RULES
Medicare has lists of codes that cannot be reported together called
National Correct Coding Initiatives (NCCI edits). These edits have
been established to ensure that providers do not report services that
are included in a pre-established bundle. For example, the same
physician would not report a standard preoperative visit related to a
major surgical procedure and then report separately the surgery and
follow-up care. All three services—preoperative, intraoperative,
postoperative—are bundled together in one major surgical CPT code.
The use of modifier -59 indicates that the service was not a part of
another service but, indeed, was a distinct service. For example, a
colonoscopy utilizing a snare (45385) and a colonoscopy with hot
biopsy forceps (45384) would usually not be reported together
because both codes would be in the edits, but if -59 was appended to
45384, the surgeon would be indicating that distinct services were
provided.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -59 requests payment for a procedure performed on the
same day as another procedure that normally would not be
reimbursed separately, e.g., a biopsy of one site and an excision of
another site.
Modifiers -x{epsu} 
Effective January 1, 2015, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) established four new HCPCS modifiers collectively
referred to as modifiers -X{EPSU} to define subsets of modifier -59.
■
 
-XE Separate Encounter.
 A service that is distinct because it
occurred during a separate encounter.
■
 
-XS Separate Structure.
 A service that is distinct because it was
performed on a separate organ/structure.
■
 
-XP Separate Practitioner.
 A service that is distinct because it was
performed by a different practitioner.
■
 
-XU Unusual Non-Overlapping Service.
 Use of a service that is
distinct because it does not overlap usual components of the main
service.
While CMS will continue to recognize modifier -59, CPT
instructions state that modifier -59 should not be used when a more
descriptive modifier is available, such as one of the modifiers -
X{EPSU}.
 For more details about
modifiers -X{EPSU}, check out 
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Guidance/Transmittals/Downloads/R1422OTN.pdf
A note of caution is that modifier -59 has been abused by providers
and excessively submitted. The Office of the Inspector General has
targeted the submission of this modifier in the past. That means
random audits of physician claim submission were conducted.
EXERCISE 10-3
Modifiers -53 through -59
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Mrs. Knight has a diagnostic surgical biopsy of deep cervical lymph
nodes on May 8, and the pathology report comes back showing
secondary malignancy with the primary site unknown. Mrs. Knight
elects to have a lymphadenectomy on May 11. What modifier
would be used with the lymphadenectomy code?
Modifier: _____________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
(ICD-9-CM Codes: ____________________,
____________________)
2 
The intraoperative service for a total esophagectomy without
reconstruction (43124)
CPT Code and Modifier: ____________________
3 
The postoperative care only for a radical mastectomy including
pectoral muscles, axillary, and internal mammary lymph nodes
(19306)
CPT Code and Modifier: ____________________
4 
The procedure in question 3 when only the preoperative service is
provided
CPT Code and Modifier: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
-62, two surgeons
Modifier -62 indicates two surgeons acted as co-surgeons. Turn to
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
 
From the Trenches
“Learning to use the CPT manual effectively as a tool is one of the best skills
I can teach my students to develop.
 
.
 
.
 
. I always advise them to start with a
strong foundation by taking classes in medical terminology, anatomy, and
physiology.”
Jane
To assign modifier -62 correctly, two physicians of different
specialties must have worked together as co-surgeons and each
surgeon must have dictated his/her own operative report. If one
physician assists another physician, the service cannot be reported
using modifier -62. Co-surgeons use different skills during the
surgery. Many third-party payers require documentation showing the
medical necessity of co-surgeons. The operative reports document
each surgeon’s participation and clearly show the distinct services
each performed. Modifier -62 is correctly reported when two
physicians are necessary to complete one surgical procedure, each
completing a distinct portion of the procedure. For example, a
cardiologist and a general surgeon may install a pacemaker, with the
general surgeon preparing the implantation site, the cardiologist
inserting and activating the pacemaker, and the general surgeon
closing the site. Each physician would report his/her service using the
pacemaker insertion code with modifier -62.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -62 will usually cue the payer to reimburse at 125% of the
fee schedule, which is then divided, half for each surgeon.
Example
A patient diagnosed with bladder cancer undergoes a radical
cystectomy and ureteroileal conduit (passage to divert urine from the
kidney to the exterior). A general surgeon opens the surgical area to
view, then a urologist removes the bladder. The general surgeon
creates an ureteroileal conduit and the general surgeon closes the
incisions. Each physician reports 51585 (complete cystectomy) with
modifier -62. The surgeons would be paid a combined 125% of the fee
schedule amount for the code (62.5% each).
-63, procedure performed on infants less than
4 kg
Modifier -63 is used to identify procedures provided to a neonate or
infant up to 4 kg (8.8 lbs). Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and
read the description of this modifier.
Do not use modifier -63 with the Integumentary System codes
(10030-19499). Parenthetical notes also follow some codes in the 20005-
69990 range and direct the coder not to report -63 with certain codes.
Procedures on neonates or infants with a body weight of less than 4
kg (8.8 lbs) are more complex than procedures that are performed on
neonates or infants with a body weight of more than 4 kg.
 
QUICK CHECK 10-4
1. 
Would modifier -63 be reported with codes 49491-49496? Why or
why not?
________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
-66, surgical team
Modifier -66 is used with very complex surgical procedures that
require several physicians, usually of different specialties, to complete
the procedure. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the
description of this modifier.
A surgical team consists of physicians (more than two), technicians,
and other trained personnel who function together to complete a
complex procedure. For example, teams are usually used in organ
transplant surgeries, with each member of the team completing the
same function at each surgery. Each physician on the team reports the
procedure code with modifier -66. Third-party payers will often
increase the total reimbursement for a team. The reimbursement is
divided among the physicians on the basis of a prearranged
agreement.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -66 will cue the payer that payment for a procedure should
be increased by whatever the contract allows to be divided by all
surgeons involved.
Example
A patient is admitted for an artificial heart transplant (33935, heart-
lung transplant with recipient cardiectomy-pneumonectomy). A team
of cardiologists, general surgeons, and thoracic surgeons performs
the surgery and each dictates a description of the procedure. Each
surgeon would report 33935 with modifier -66. Each surgeon not only
dictates his or her portion of the surgery but also submits his or her
own claim.
-76, repeat procedure or service by same
physician or other qualified health care
professional
Modifier -76 is assigned to report services or procedures that are being
repeated by the same physician. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT
manual and read the description of this modifier.
The modifier is reported to indicate to third-party payers that the
services are not duplicate services and the bill is not a duplicate bill.
Sometimes these repeat services are provided on the same day as the
previous service, and without the use of modifier -76, the third-party
payer would assume a duplicate bill had been submitted. When
modifier -76 has been submitted, documentation to establish medical
necessity may be requested by the third-party payer.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -76 requests payment for a service that was repeated. If the
modifier was not used, the subsequent service would be denied as a
duplicate service.
-77, repeat procedure by another physician or
other qualified health care professional
Modifier -77 reports services or procedures that are repeated and are
provided by an individual other than the individual who originally
provided the service or procedure. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT
manual and read the description of this modifier.
Modifier -77 reports to the third-party payer that the services are
not duplicate services and, therefore, the bill is not a duplicate bill.
Sometimes these repeat services are provided on the same day as the
original service or during the postoperative period. Without the use of
modifier -77, the third-party payer would assume a duplicate bill had
been submitted. When modifier -77 has been assigned, documentation
must accompany the claim in order to establish the medical necessity
for the procedure.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -77 requests payment for a service that was repeated. If the
modifier was not used, the subsequent service would be denied as a
duplicate service.
If only a portion of the original service or procedure is repeated,
you would also assign modifier -52 to indicate a reduced service.
 
CAUTION 
CMS stated that the increased use of both -76 and -77 indicates possible
inappropriate assignment with E/M services, and closer monitoring will be
given to the submission of these two modifiers.
-78, unplanned return to the
operating/procedure room by the same
physician or other qualified health care
professional following initial procedure for a
related procedure during the postoperative
period
Modifier -78 is assigned to indicate a circumstance in which a patient
is returned to the operating room for surgical treatment of a
complication that resulted from the first procedure. Turn to 
Appendix
A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this modifier.
Modifier -78 is appended to the subsequent procedure code to
indicate to the third-party payer that the second surgery was
necessary because of complications resulting from the first operation.
For many third-party payers, only the surgery portion (intraoperative)
of the surgical package is paid when the -78 modifier is reported. The
patient remains within the postoperative period of the first operation
for any further preoperative or postoperative care. For example, if the
patient were to develop a second set of complications stemming from
the original surgery, you would again report the procedure performed
to treat the second complication and add modifier -78 to the code. This
way, the third-party payer continues to know that the complication
requiring surgery originated from the original surgery during the
global period.
 
CAUTION 
If there were a complication, you would report -78 (Unplanned Return to the
Operating/Procedure Room) and -76 (Repeat Procedure or Service by Same
Physician or Other Qualified Health Care Professional). For example, if a
patient who has an open heart coronary artery bypass graft procedure
(Service 1) returns to the operating room for tamponade (fluid accumulation
in the pericardium) twice on the same day (Services 2 and 3), modifier -76
would be appended to the procedure as follows:
Service 1
33510
Coronary artery bypass graft
Service 2
35820-78
Exploration for postoperative hemorrhage, chest
Service 3
35820-78-76
Repeat exploration for postoperative hemorrhage, chest
Services 2 and 3 procedures should be reimbursed at the intraoperative
rate, but the global period would continue from the first session and would
not start over again.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -78 will cue the payer to reimburse the procedure at the
intraoperative percent of the service. The patient remains in the
global period for the initial surgery.
An “operating/procedure” room is defined as a place of service
specifically equipped and staffed for the sole purpose of performing
procedures. For example, a cardiac catheterization suite, a laser suite,
or an endoscopy suite. It does not include a patient’s room, a minor
treatment room, a recovery room, or intensive care unit (unless the
patient’s condition was so critical there was insufficient time for
transport to an operating room).
-79, unrelated procedure or service by the
same physician or other qualified health care
professional during the postoperative period
Modifier -79 explains that a patient requires surgery for a condition
totally unrelated to the condition for which the first operation was
performed. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the
description of this modifier.
For example, the patient had an appendectomy and 2 weeks later
had a gallbladder episode that necessitates removal of the gallbladder.
Modifier -79 would be placed on the cholecystectomy code, indicating
that the subsequent procedure was unrelated to the first procedure.
The diagnosis codes for the two procedures would also be different,
further indicating the two procedures were unrelated.
 
CAUTION 
Do not use modifier -79 with staged procedures (use modifier -58) or with
procedures that are related to the original procedure. If the service is
provided during the postoperative period of a major surgical procedure,
billing separately for services included in the surgical package is fraudulent.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -79 requests payment for the full fee of the subsequent
service because it was unassociated with the first procedure. A new
global period should start when -79 is submitted.
-80, assistant surgeon
A surgical assistant is one who provides service (an extra pair of
hands) to the primary surgeon during a surgical procedure. Turn to
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
The assistant surgeon’s services are reported using the same code as
the primary surgeon’s, but modifier -80 is added to alert the third-
party payer to the assistant surgeon’s status. Usually, the assistant
surgeon receives 15% to 30% of the usual charge for a surgery when
acting in the assistant capacity. Not all payers allow for an assistant
surgeon on all procedures. A preauthorization for surgery should be
completed before surgery to determine if the payer will reimburse for
an assistant surgeon.
 
CODING SHOT
Preauthorization does not guarantee payment, as the payer can
always deny the approval upon review.
 
CAUTION 
A physician assistant providing assist at surgery would use the HCPCS
modifier -AS, not modifier -80.
-81, minimum assistant surgeon
Modifier -81 indicates an assistant surgeon who provides services that
are less extensive than those described by modifier -80. Turn to
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
Modifier -81 is not commonly used, although there are times when
an assistant surgeon is present and assists for only a portion of the
procedure. This minimal assistant surgeon service is then reported by
adding -81 to the surgical code. Some third-party payers define a
minimal assistant surgeon as a nurse practitioner, physician’s
assistant, or other specialized clinical nursing personnel, but
according to the CPT definition, the service is provided by a physician
acting in a minimal capacity. You should receive written directives
from the third-party payer before reporting -81 for individuals other
than a physician.
Many third-party payers do not pay for a minimum assistant
surgeon. For example, Medicare will pay for a minimum assistant
only on rare occasions in which medical necessity can be proven.
Usually, the minimum assistant surgeon receives 10% of the usual
charge for a surgery.
-82, assistant surgeon (when qualified resident
surgeon not available)
Modifier -82 is assigned when the hospital in which the procedure
was performed has an affiliation with a medical school and has a
residency program, but no resident was available to serve as an
assistant surgeon. Residents are physicians who are completing a
required surgical training period in the hospital during which the
residents serve as employees of the hospital who are there to receive
training and provide assistance to physicians as part of the hospital’s
agreement with the medical school. Hospitals that have affiliations
with medical schools are considered teaching facilities. Turn to
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the description of this
modifier.
Do not confuse modifier -80 (assistant surgeon) with -82 when
reporting services.
 
CODING SHOT
Medicare does not pay for an assistant surgeon if the hospital has a
residency program.
Modifier -82 has very limited use and requires supporting
documentation that the patient’s condition was such that the service
required an assistant surgeon and that a qualified resident was not
available.
EXERCISE 10-4
Modifiers -62 through -82
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, indicate the correct
modifier and diagnosis codes where indicated:
1 
Dr. Edwards, a cardiologist, and Dr. Mathews, a general surgeon,
worked together as primary surgeons on a complex surgical case.
What modifier would be added to the CPT surgery codes for the
services of both Dr. Edwards and Dr. Mathews?
Modifier: ____________
2 
A team of physicians with different specialties, along with a highly
skilled team of technical personnel, performed a liver transplant for
a patient with chronic viral hepatitis C that has resulted in cirrhosis
of the liver. Which modifier would indicate the surgical team
concept?
Modifier: ____________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
3 
Dr. Stenopolis served as a surgical assistant to Dr. Edwards in a
quadruple bypass procedure. Dr. Stenopolis’ services were reported
by using this modifier:
Modifier: ____________
4 
In the middle of the bypass procedure in Question 3, the patient
experienced severe complications. Dr. Edwards asked Dr. Loren to
come into the operating room to temporarily assist with the surgery
to stabilize the patient. What modifier would be used when
reporting the service Dr. Loren provided?
Modifier: ____________
5 
A patient had a hernia repair and two days later returned to the
operating room for a dehiscence of the incision. When coding the
secondary hernia repair, which modifier would you add onto the
surgical code?
Modifier: ____________
6 
If Mr. Smith undergoes an appendectomy on June 8, and then a
cholecystectomy is performed on August 16 by the same surgeon,
what modifier would be placed on the cholecystectomy code?
Modifier: ____________
7 
What modifier would you add to a code to indicate that a basic
procedure performed by another physician was repeated?
Modifier: ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
-90, reference (outside) laboratory
Modifier -90 is used to indicate that services of an outside laboratory
were used. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the
description of this modifier.
This modifier is reported with Pathology and Laboratory codes to
report that the procedures were performed by someone other than the
treating or reporting physician.
CMS RULES
Medicare does not allow physicians to bill for outside laboratory
services and then reimburse the outside laboratory for those services.
If the outside laboratory provides the services, the outside laboratory
must report the services.
-91, repeat clinical diagnostic laboratory test
Modifier -91 reports a laboratory test that was performed on the same
day as the original laboratory test. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT
manual and read the description of this modifier.
This modifier is correctly assigned when a laboratory test has been
repeated so as to produce multiple test results. It cannot be assigned if
the lab equipment malfunctioned or 
if there was a problem with the
specimen, because this would result in third-party payers’ paying for
laboratory errors. Also, do not assign the modifier for services
performed because a subsequent test was done to confirm the results
of the initial test. The modifier also cannot be assigned when there is a
series of test results, such as those performed in allergy testing.
-92, alternative laboratory platform testing
Modifier -92 reports those incidents when a kit or transportable
instrument is used in a laboratory test. For example, a single-use,
disposable HIV kit (86701-86703). Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT
manual and read the description of this modifier.
-95, synchronous telemedicine services
Modifier -95 is only used when a provider and patient interact from
separate locations, and if a star (
★
) symbol appears next to the code.
A full list of codes that can be reported with modifier -95 are listed in
Appendix P.
-99, multiple modifiers
Modifier -99 is needed only if the third-party payer does not accept
multiple modifiers. This is the case with some computerized insurance
submissions. Turn to 
Appendix A
 in the CPT manual and read the
description of this modifier.
On the CMS-1500 insurance claim form (
Fig. 10-2
) there is space for
multiple modifiers. Third-party payers vary in terms of how they
require multiple modifiers to be reported, so be certain to check with
the payer before submitting multiple modifiers.
EXERCISE 10-5
Modifiers -90 through -99
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
What is the modifier that indicates that multiple modifiers apply?
____________
2 
What modifier would be added to the laboratory procedure code to
indicate testing by an outside laboratory? ____________
3 
The medical record indicated that the physician had an established
patient go to the lab for a blood panel in the morning, and in the
afternoon had the patient return to the lab for another blood panel
so as to produce multiple test results. What modifier would you
add to the code for the panel? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
FIGURE 10–2
Multiple modifiers on the CMS-1500 insurance claim
form.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 10, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What part of the CPT manual lists a full description for all
modifiers? __________________________________________
2 When a CPT code does not fully explain an unusual procedure,
what should be added to the code? ___________________
3 What modifier is applied to a surgical procedure to indicate
increased physician work was performed? __________
4 What modifier is applied to indicate a service for which general
anesthesia was used when normally local anesthesia would be
indicated? __________
5 What modifier is applied to indicate an E&M encounter was
performed and not related to a current global period? __________
6 When a patient comes into the office twice in one day for different
medical reasons, the -25 modifier should be applied to which visit?
_________________________
7 What modifier indicates the professional component of a diagnostic
test? __________
8 Third-party payers require this modifier for a mandated service.
__________
9 Modifier -33 indicates a covered preventive service. What
organization grades preventive services? ___________________
10 Modifier -47, anesthesia by the surgeon, is never added to what
CPT codes? _____________________________________
11 How many units of service may be billed when reporting the -50
modifier to Medicare? ____________________________
12 When reporting -51 modifier to indicate multiple procedures
performed, which procedure should be reported first on the claim?
_____________________________
13 Some payers may decrease the payment on a procedure when this
modifier is applied. __________
14 Modifier -53, discontinued procedure, is never reported with E/M
codes or codes based on what? __________
15 When the surgeon transfers postoperative care to another
physician, report with what modifier? __________
16 Modifier -55 is used for services provided to the patient after what
disposition? __________________________________
17 Medicare considers what service to be part of the surgery and
bundled payment not allowing the -56 modifier?
______________________________
18 E/M services provided the day before or the day of a major surgery
are included in what package? ____________________
19 A planned procedure intended to include the original procedure
plus one or more subsequent procedures is indicated by what
modifier? __________
20 Modifier -59 is applicable to all CPT codes except what type of
codes? ________________________________
21 When two physicians of different specialties work together as co-
surgeons, modifier -62 is supported if the operative note clearly
shows what type of services? ______________________________
22 Modifier -63 indicates procedures provided to a neonate or infant
up to what weight? _____________________________
23 A surgical team consists of how many physicians?
____________________________
24 To avoid duplicate procedure denials by the same provider, what
modifier should be applied? __________
25 To avoid duplicate procedure denials by different providers, what
modifier should be applied? __________
26 What is defined as a place of service specifically equipped and
staffed for the sole purpose of performing procedures?
______________________________
27 Billing separately for services included in the surgical package is
considered what? ________________________________
28 A physician assistant providing assist at surgery would use HCPCS
modifier -AS. What modifier would a physician surgical assistant
use? __________
29 When an assistant surgeon is present and provides minimum assist
for the procedure, what modifier should be applied? __________
30 Hospitals that have affiliations with medical schools are considered
what type of facility? ___________________________
31 When providers use an outside laboratory, who is responsible for
billing these Medicare services? ____________________
32 Is it appropriate to bill for repeat lab tests with a -91 modifier when
a subsequent test is performed to confirm results of the initial test?
__________
33 What modifier identifies a lab test is performed using a kit or
transportable instrument that wholly or in part consists of a single-
use, disposable analytical chamber? __________
34 How many modifier areas are available on a CMS-1500 insurance
claim form for one-line item charge? __________
Chapter 10, part I, theory
Complete the following:
1 When more than two physicians, with technicians and specialized
equipment, work together to complete a complicated procedure and
each physician has a specific portion of the surgery to complete,
they are termed what?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 Can modifier -22 be assigned to 99291, 99292 codes?
Yes   No
3 This modifier indicates an increased service and is overused and
results in an increase in payment of 20% to 30%. As such, the
assignment of this modifier comes under particularly close scrutiny
by third-party payers. What is this modifier? 
(Make sure to include a
dash in front of your modifier answer. -XX)
_____________________________________
4 When modifier ____ is assigned, payment for the intraoperative or
surgery portion of the surgical procedure is being requested. 
(Make
sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answer. -XX)
5 Joan is a new coder at the local clinic. You have been assigned to
review her coding before it is submitted to the third-party payer.
You note that she assigned modifier -32 to E/M consultation code
99244. The medical record indicates that the request for the second
opinion was made by the patient’s spouse. Is Joan correct in
modifier -32 assignment?
Yes   No
6 Which of these statements is true about modifier -59?
a It is only appended to E/M codes.
b It is only appended to other than E/M codes.
7 What is the weight in pounds of a 4-kilogram infant?
a 7.9
b 8.8
c 8.9
d 9.1
8 Which of the following two statements are NOT true about modifier
-53?
a Describes circumstances based on the patient’s
preoperative condition
b May be used to describe those times when the
physician elects to terminate a procedure due to
the well-being of the patient
c Describes circumstances in which the patient
canceled the procedure
d May be used to describe ASC reporting of
previously scheduled procedure that is partially
reduced as a result of extenuating
circumstances
9 Modifier -57 can be added to Surgery section codes.
True   False
10 When adding multiple CPT modifiers to a code, you would list the
modifiers from:
a Highest to lowest
b Lowest to highest
c Makes no difference which is listed first
Chapter 10, part II, practical
Using your CPT manual, identify the modifier for the following descriptions
(Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers. -XX):
11 Repeat procedure or service by same physician ____________
12 Two surgeons ____________
13 Professional component ____________
14 Multiple modifiers ____________
15 Distinct procedural service ____________
16 Mandated service ____________
17 Significant identifiable E/M service provided by the same
individual on the same day as another service or procedure
____________
18 Minimum assistant surgeon ____________
19 Repeat procedure by another individual ____________
20 Unrelated procedure or service by the same individual during the
postoperative period ____________
21 Unusual anesthesia ____________
22 Unplanned return to the operating room for a related procedure
during the postoperative period ____________
23 Surgical care only ____________
24 Reduced service ____________
25 Surgical team ____________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 11
Evaluation and management
(E/M) services
 
“I think having a goal of being a lifelong learner is important. One also
has to have a great degree of integrity. It takes knowledge and
character to adhere to the correct way to do things and not be swayed
by other factors, such as how to ‘get it paid.’ ”
Joan E. Wolfgang, MEd, RHIT, CPC, COC, CPC-I, CCA
Faculty
 
Milwaukee Area Technical College
 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
CHAPTER TOPICS
Contents of the E/M Section
Three Factors of E/M Codes
Various Levels of E/M Service
An E/M Code Example
Using the E/M Codes
Documentation Guidelines
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Identify and explain the three factors of E/M code assignment.
2 
Differentiate between a new and an established patient.
3 
Differentiate between an inpatient and an outpatient.
4 
Explain the levels of E/M service.
5 
Review the key components.
6 
Analyze the key component history.
7 
Analyze the key component examination.
8 
Analyze the key component medical decision making.
9 
List contributory factors.
10 
Analyze code information.
11 
Analyze the types of E/M codes.
12 
Identify CMS Documentation Guidelines.
13 
Demonstrate the ability to code E/M services.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Contents of the E/M section
The information in 
Chapter 8
 described the basic format of the CPT
manual. The information and exercises in this chapter will familiarize
you with the first section of the CPT manual, Evaluation and
Management (E/M). Locate the index in the E/M section of the CPT
manual, titled Evaluation and Management (E/M) Services
Guidelines. It provides a listing of headings and subheadings for the
categories and subcategories of Evaluation and Management services
as illustrated in the table below.

Three factors of E/M codes
Code assignment in the E/M section varies according to three factors:
1. 
Place of service
2. 
Type of service
3. 
Patient status
Place of service
The first factor you must consider in code assignment is the place of
service (
Fig. 11-1
).
FIGURE 11–1
Place of service.
Place of service explains the setting in which the services were
provided to the patient. Codes vary depending on the place of the
service. Places of service can be a physician’s office, hospital,
emergency department, nursing home, and so on.
Type of service
The second factor in code assignment is the type of service (
Fig. 11-2
).
FIGURE 11–2
Type of service.
Type of service is the reason the service is requested or performed.
Examples of types of service are consultation, admission, newborn
care, and office visit.
■
 
Consultation
 is a written or verbal request from one
provider/physician to another to obtain an opinion and/or advice
about a diagnosis or management options.
■
 
Admission
 is attention to an acute illness or injury that results in
admission to a hospital.
■
 
Newborn care
 is the evaluation and determination of care
management of a newly born infant.
■
 
Office visit
 is a face-to-face encounter between a physician and a
patient to allow for primary management of the patient’s health
care status.
Patient status
The third factor in code assignment is patient status (
Fig. 11-3
).
FIGURE 11–3
Patient status.
The four types of patient 
status
 are new patient, established patient,
outpatient, and inpatient. Codes are often grouped in the CPT manual
according to the type of patient involved.
■
 
New
 patient is one who has not received professional services from
the physician or another physician of the exact same specialty and
subspecialty in the same group within the past 3 years.
■
 
Established
 patient is one who has received professional services
from the physician or another physician of the exact same specialty
and subspecialty in the same group within the past 3 years.
■
 
Outpatient
 is one who has not been formally admitted to a health
care facility or a patient admitted for observation.
■
 
Inpatient
 is one who has been formally admitted to a health care
facility.
EXERCISE 11-1
Three Factors of E/M Codes
Using a CPT manual, locate the subsection Office and Other
Outpatient Services and then the category New Patient in the E/M
section to answer the following questions:
1 
Where is the place of service? ___________________
2 
What is the type of service? ___________________
3 
What is the patient status? ___________________
4 
What is the first code number listed under the subheading New
Patient?
CPT Code: ___________________
5 
Each code represents a different level of service. How many codes
are listed under Office or Other Outpatient Services for a new
patient? ____________
6 
How many codes are listed for the established patient in the Office
or Other Outpatient Services category? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Medical records documentation
Patient information is located in the medical record. This information
is referred to as 
documentation
. The documentation in the medical
record has many uses, such as evaluation of the patient’s treatment,
communications regarding the patient’s health care, reimbursement
claims, review of the use of the health care facility, research/education,
and legal documentation. Seven organizations (American Health
Information Management Association, American Hospital
Association, Managed Care and Review Association, American
Medical Association, American Medical Peer Review Association,
Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, and the Health Insurance
Association of America) developed minimum documentation
guidelines, as follows:
1. 
The medical record should be complete and legible.
2. 
Documentation of each encounter should include the date, reason
for encounter, appropriate history and physical examination, review
of ancillary services, assessment, and plan of care with provider
signature and date.
3. 
Past and present diagnoses should be accessible to the treating
and/or consulting physician.
4. 
The reasons for and results of x-rays, lab tests, and other ancillary
services should be clear.
5. 
Relevant risk factors should be identified.
6. 
The patient’s progress and response to treatment, any change in
treatment or change in diagnosis, and any patient noncompliance
should be documented.
7. 
A written plan of treatment should include, when appropriate,
treatments and medications, specifying frequency and dosage, any
referrals or consultations, patient or family education, and any specific
instructions for follow-up care.
8. 
Documentation should report the intensity of the patient evaluation
and/or the treatment, including thought processes and the complexity
of the medical decision making.
9. 
All entries should be dated and authenticated by provider or
provider extender.
10. 
The CPT and ICD-10-CM codes reported on the insurance claim or
billing statement should reflect 
(support)
 the documentation in the
medical record.
Various levels of E/M service
The levels of E/M service are based on documentation located in the
patient’s medical record supporting various amounts of skill, effort,
time, responsibility, and medical knowledge used by the physician to
provide the service to the patient. 
Figure 11-4
 illustrates one example
of an audit form that could be used assess E/M services. The levels of
service are based on 
key components
 (history, examination, and
medical decision-making complexity) and 
contributory factors
(counseling, coordination of care, nature of presenting problem, and
time). The components contain a great deal of information that you
need to know before you learn about factors. Let’s look at each of
these components and factors individually.
FIGURE 11-4
Example of an E/M Audit Form.
Key components
■
 
History
■
 
Examination
■
 
Medical decision making
The key components of history, examination, and medical decision
making reflect the clinical information that is recorded by the
physician in the patient’s medical record. Key components are present
in every patient case except counseling encounters, which are
discussed later in the chapter. Key components enable you to choose
the appropriate level of service. New patient encounters,
consultations, emergency department visits, and admissions require
documentation of all three of the key components. Subsequent visits
such as daily hospital visits or outpatient visits for an established
patient require that only two of the three key components be present
for assignment to a given code. For example, to assign code 99214—
established patient, office visit—at least two of the three key
components must be documented in the patient’s medical record.
Example
99214
Office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of an established patient, which requires 
at least two
of these three key components:
• 
a detailed history;
• 
a detailed examination;
• 
medical decision making of moderate complexity.
Office, new patient
According to the E/M Guidelines, the following
categories/subcategories must meet or exceed the stated level of the
key components:
■
 
Office or Other Outpatient Services, New Patient
■
 
Initial Observation Care, New or Established Patient
■
 
Initial Hospital Care, New or Established Patient
■
 
Office or Other Outpatient Consultations, New or Established
Patient
■
 
Observation or Inpatient Care Services, New or Established Patient
■
 
Inpatient Consultations, New or Established Patient
■
 
Emergency Department Services, New or Established Patient
■
 
Initial Nursing Facility Care, New or Established Patient
■
 
Domiciliary, Rest Home (e.g., Boarding Home), or Custodial Care
Services, New Patient
■
 
Home Services, New Patient
 
QUICK CHECK 11-1
1. 
The above categories/subcategories must meet or ____________
____________ of three key components.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Of the following categories/subcategories, 
two
 of the 
three
 key
components must be met or exceeded before the code may be
assigned:
■
 
Office or Other Outpatient Services, Established Patient
■
 
Subsequent Observation Care, New or Established Patient
■
 
Subsequent Hospital Care, New or Established Patient
■
 
Subsequent Nursing Facility Care, New or Established Patient
■
 
Domiciliary Care, Rest Home (e.g., Boarding Home), or Custodial
Care Services, Established Patient
■
 
Home, Established Patient
History. 
The history is the subjective information the patient tells the physician
based on the four elements of a history—chief complaint (CC); history
of present illness (HPI); review of systems (ROS); and past, family,
and social history (PFSH). The history contains the information the
physician needs to appropriately assess the patient’s condition. Not all
histories have all elements. The inclusion of each of the elements and
the extent to which each of the elements is contained in a history are
determined by the physician, based on the need for more or less
subjective information, and will determine the extent of the history
level. The documentation of the history is found in the patient’s
medical record and is recorded by the physician.
Ancillary staff (nurses, physician assistants, and so forth) are
allowed to document some of the history, such as chief complaint and
past, family, and social histories, but the physician must authenticate
the entries (physician must evaluate the form and indicate in the
medical record that the form has been reviewed). Also, a physician
can have the patient complete a form composed of questions
concerning the review of systems; however, the physician must
authenticate the information.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-2
1. 
Some history elements may be documented by ancillary staff or the
patient.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
The four elements of a history
■
 
Chief Complaint (CC)
■
 
History of Present Illness (HPI)
■
 
Review of Systems (ROS)
■
 
Past, Family, and/or Social History (PFSH)
History elements. 
You need to be able to identify the various elements and levels of a
history by reading the notes entered into the medical record by the
physician.
1. 
Chief Complaint (CC)
 is a concise statement describing the
symptom, problem, condition, diagnosis, physician-recommended
return, or other factor that is the reason for the encounter, usually
stated in the patient’s words.
2. 
History of Present Illness (HPI)
 is a chronological description of
the development of the patient’s present illness from the first sign
and/or symptom or from the previous encounter to the present. The
HPI may include the elements identified in the following example:
Example
Location:
 thoracic spine (site on body)
Quality:
 burning, throbbing (characteristics)
Severity:
 on a scale of 1 to 10, an 8 (intensity)
Duration:
 3 days (how long is an episode or how long has the
problem existed)
Timing:
 throughout the day, continuously, at night, in the morning,
etc., the frequency (when does it occur)
Context:
 when bending over (under what circumstances does it occur)
Modifying factors:
 better when lying down (what circumstances
make it better or worse)
Associated signs and symptoms:
 weakness (what else is present that
relates to chief complaint)
The HPI must be documented in the medical record by the physician.
TOOLBOX 11-1
 
Juanita presents to her family physician today with complaints of
sharp stomach pain (5/10, 5 on a severity scale of 10) for 6 days,
usually in the afternoon after her afternoon coffee.
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS (HPI)
1. 
Location (site on body)
2. 
Quality (characteristic: throbbing, sharp)
3. 
Severity (1/10 or how intense)
4. 
Duration (how long for problem or episode)
5. 
Timing (when it occurs)
6. 
Context (under what circumstances does it occur)
7. 
Modifying factors (what makes it better or worse)
8. 
Associated signs and symptoms (what else is happening when it occurs)
Question
An E/M audit form would have the HPI elements listed as in the
audit form on the left. The coder checks off each element of the HPI as
documented in the medical record. Check off the HPI elements on the
audit form based on Juanita’s record.
How many elements did you count?
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
3. 
Review of Systems (ROS)
 is an inventory of body systems obtained
through a series of questions seeking to identify signs and/or
symptoms that the patient may be experiencing or has experienced.
According to Huffman’s 
Health Information Management,
*
 the “ROS is
an inventory of systems to reveal subjective symptoms that the patient
either forgot to describe or which at the time seemed relatively
unimportant. In general, an analysis of the subjective findings will
indicate the nature and extent of examination required.” The
inventory of systems may be made by means of a questionnaire filled
out by the patient or ancillary staff; but the physician 
must
 evaluate
the questionnaire and document in the medical record that the
questionnaire has been reviewed in order for it to qualify as an ROS.
For the purposes of an ROS, the following systems are recognized
*
:
■
 
Constitutional symptoms
Usual weight, recent weight changes, fever,
weakness, fatigue
■
 
Eyes (Ophthalmologic)
Glasses or contact lenses, last eye examination,
visual glaucoma, cataracts, eyestrain, pain,
diplopia, redness, lacrimation, inflammation,
blurring
■
 
Ears, Nose, Mouth, Throat (Otolaryngologic)
Ears: hearing, discharge, tinnitus, dizziness, pain
Nose: head colds, epistaxis, discharges,
obstruction, postnasal drip, sinus pain
Mouth and Throat: condition of teeth and gums,
last dental examination, soreness, redness,
hoarseness, difficulty in swallowing
■
 
Cardiovascular
Chest pain, rheumatic fever, tachycardia,
palpitation, high blood pressure, edema,
vertigo, faintness, varicose veins,
thrombophlebitis
■
 
Respiratory
Chest pain, wheezing, cough, dyspnea, sputum
(color and quantity), hemoptysis, asthma,
bronchitis, emphysema, pneumonia,
tuberculosis, pleurisy, last chest radiograph
(note: also shortness of breath)
■
 
Gastrointestinal
Appetite, thirst, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis,
rectal bleeding, change in bowel habits,
diarrhea, constipation, indigestion, food
intolerance, flatus, hemorrhoids, jaundice
■
 
Genitourinary
Urinary: frequent or painful urination, nocturia,
pyuria, hematuria, incontinence, urinary
infection
Genito-reproductive: male—venereal disease,
sores, discharge from penis, hernias, testicular
pain or masses; female—age at menarche and
menstruation (frequency, type, duration,
dysmenorrhea, menorrhagia; symptoms of
menopause), contraception, pregnancies,
deliveries, abortions, last Papanicolaou smear
■
 
Musculoskeletal
Joint pain or stiffness, arthritis, gout, backache,
muscle pain, cramps, swelling, redness,
limitation in motor activity
■
 
Integumentary (skin and/or breast)
Skin: rashes, eruptions, dryness, cyanosis,
jaundice, changes in skin, hair, or nails
**
Breast: lumps, dimpling, nipple discharge
**
■
 
Neurologic 
(neurological)
Faintness, blackouts, seizures, paralysis, tingling,
tremors, memory loss
■
 
Psychiatric
Personality type, nervousness, mood, insomnia,
headache, nightmares, depression
■
 
Endocrine
Thyroid trouble, heat or cold intolerance,
excessive sweating, thirst, hunger, or urination,
blood sugar levels
■
 
Hematologic/Lymphatic
Anemia, easy bruising or bleeding, past
transfusions
■
 
Allergic/Immunologic
Sneezing, itching eyes, rhinorrhea, nasal
obstruction, or recurrent infections
4. 
Past, Family, and Social History (PFSH)
^
■
 
Past history is the patient’s past experience with
illnesses, operations, injuries, and treatments
that includes significant information about:
Prior major illnesses and injuries
Prior operations
Prior hospitalizations
Current medications
Allergies (e.g., drug, food)
Age-appropriate immunization status
Age-appropriate feeding/dietary status
■
 
Social history is an age-appropriate review of
past and current activities that includes
significant information about:
Marital status and/or living arrangements
Current employment
Occupational history
Military history
Use of drugs, alcohol, and tobacco
Level of education
Sexual history
Other relevant social factors
■
 
Family history is a review of medical events in
the patient’s family that includes significant
information about:
The health status or cause of death of parents,
siblings, and children
Specific diseases related to problems identified in
the Chief Complaint or History of the Present
Illness, and/or System Review
Diseases of family members that may be
hereditary or place the patient at risk
Three of the elements of a history (HPI, ROS, and PFSH) are
included to varying degrees in all patient encounters. The degree or
level of HPI, ROS, and PFSH is determined by the chief complaint or
presenting problem of the patient.
History levels. 
Now that you have reviewed the elements of a history, you are
prepared to choose a history level. There are four history levels; the
level is based on the extent of the history during the history-taking
portion of the physician-patient encounter.
The history of present illness (HPI) must be documented by the physician
or nonphysician practitioner (NPP) billing for the service.
History levels
■
 
Problem focused
■
 
Expanded problem focused
■
 
Detailed
■
 
Comprehensive
1. 
Problem focused:
 The physician focuses on the chief complaint and
a brief history of the present problem of a patient.
A brief history would include a review of the
history regarding pertinent information about
the present problem or chief complaint. Brief
history information would center around the
severity, duration, and/or symptoms of the
problem or complaint. The brief history does
not have to include the past, family, or social
history or a review of systems. A brief HPI
includes 1-3 of the eight elements.
2. 
Expanded problem focused:
 The physician focuses on a chief
complaint, obtains a brief history of the present problem, and also
performs a problem pertinent review of systems. The expanded
problem focused history does not have to include the past, family, or
social history.
This history would center around specific
questions regarding the system involved in the
presenting problem or chief complaint. The
review of systems for this history would cover
the organ system most closely related to the
chief complaint or presenting problem and any
related or associated organ system. For
example, if the presenting problem or chief
complaint is a red, swollen knee, the system
reviewed would be the musculoskeletal system.
3. 
Detailed:
 The physician focuses on a chief complaint, obtains an
extended history of the present problem (4 or more of the 8 elements),
an extended review of systems, and a pertinent PFSH.
The system review in this history is extended,
which means that positive responses and
pertinent negative responses relating to
multiple organ systems should be documented.
4. 
Comprehensive:
 This is the most complex of the history types: the
physician documents the chief complaint, obtains an extended history
of the present problem, does a complete review of systems, and
obtains a complete PFSH.
For a summary of the elements required for each level of history
(according to the 1995 Documentation Guidelines), see 
Fig. 11-5
.
FIGURE 11–5
History elements required for each level of history.
Some third-party payers have established standards for the number
of elements that must be documented in the medical record to qualify
for a given level of service. For example, a third-party payer may state
that to qualify as a comprehensive history the medical record must
document that an extended HPI was conducted and that it included
four of the eight elements (e.g., location, quality, severity, duration), a
complete ROS, including a review of at least 10 of the 14 organ
systems, and a complete review of all three areas of the PFSH.
 
CODING SHOT
When selecting a history level, the choice goes to the lowest level. For
example, if the HPI is a level 2, the ROS is a level 2, but the PFSH is a
level 1, the history level is 1. Another example is if the HPI is a level 3,
the ROS is a level 2, and the PFSH is a level 2, the history is a level 2.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-3
1. 
Which levels of history require the documentation of the Chief
Complaint (CC)?
a. 
Problem focused
b. 
Expanded problem focused
c. 
Detailed
d. 
Comprehensive
e. 
All of the above
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 11-2
History Levels
Using the CPT manual, locate the Office or Other Outpatient
Services subsection, New Patient category, to identify the history
level on each of the following codes:
Code
History Level
1 
99201
_________________________________________________________________________________
2 
99202
_________________________________________________________________________________
3 
99203
_________________________________________________________________________________
4 
99204
_________________________________________________________________________________
5 
99205
_________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Examination. 
The patient has presented the physician with the 
subjective
information regarding the complaint or problem in the history portion
of the encounter; now the physician will do an examination of the
patient to provide 
objective
 information, “hands-on” (those findings
observed by the physician) about the complaint or problem. The
physician then documents the objective findings in the patient record.
Examination levels. 
The examination levels have the same titles as the history levels—
problem focused, expanded problem focused, detailed, and
comprehensive. The four levels are used to indicate the extent and
complexity of the patient examination.
Examination levels
■
 
Problem focused
■
 
Expanded problem focused
■
 
Detailed
■
 
Comprehensive
1. 
Problem focused:
 Examination is limited to the affected body area
or organ system identified by the chief complaint.
2. 
Expanded problem focused:
 A limited examination is made of the
affected body area or organ system and other symptomatic or related
body area(s)/organ system(s).
3. 
Detailed:
 An extended examination is made of the affected body
area(s) and other symptomatic or related organ system(s).
4. 
Comprehensive:
 This is the most extensive examination; it
encompasses a general multi-system examination and should include
findings about 8 or more of the 12 organ systems.
Some third-party payers, such as Medicare, have guidelines for the
comprehensive examination that state that only organ systems qualify
when determining the level for the comprehensive examination and
that body areas do not qualify.
Fig. 11-6
 summarizes the elements required for each level of
examination. These elements include various body areas (BAs) and
organ systems (OSs). The elements also include an assessment of a
patient’s general condition, which is indicated by the patient’s general
appearance, vital signs, and the like.
EXERCISE 11-3
Examination Levels
Using the CPT manual, locate the Office or Other Outpatient
Services subsection, New Patient category, to identify the
examination levels for each of the following codes:
Code
Examination Levels
1 
99201
________________________________________________________________________________
2 
99202
________________________________________________________________________________
3 
99203
________________________________________________________________________________
4 
99204
________________________________________________________________________________
5 
99205
________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)

FIGURE 11–6
Examination elements required for each level of
examination.
The patient’s medical record will reflect the number of systems
examined in a brief statement of the findings. The examination would
include the examination elements and the number and extent of
elements required for the physician to arrive at the diagnosis. For
example, if a patient came to a physician with the complaint of a small
foreign object lodged in the eye, the physician would not usually need
to do a cardiologic examination. The extent of the examination is
based on what needs to be done to treat the patient.
Now you need to pull all the information on history and
examination together so that it is usable information. What better way
to do that than to use the information in the practical application of an
exercise?
EXERCISE 11-4
Examination Elements
Label each of the following as body area (BA) or organ system (OS):
1 
Skin ____________
2 
Head ____________
3 
Eyes ____________
4 
Ears ____________
5 
Nose ____________
6 
Mouth ____________
7 
Throat ____________
8 
Neck ____________
9 
Thorax, anterior and posterior ____________
10 
Breasts ____________
11 
Lungs ____________
12 
Heart ____________
13 
Abdomen ____________
14 
Genitourinary ____________
15 
Vagina ____________
16 
Arm ____________
17 
Musculoskeletal ____________
18 
Lymphatics ____________
19 
Psychiatric ____________
20 
Neurologic ____________
Read the following patient record:
21 
A new patient, an 8-year-old female, is brought into the office by
her mother, who states that the child has an earache in her right ear.
Mother reports that the child has been complaining of pain in right
ear with a severity of 8 of 10 for the past 2 days. Exam: Child
appears to be in only minor distress. Vitals: Temperature, 101° F.
Tympanic membrane red, fluid noted in right ear. Health history
reviewed. Diagnosis: Acute serous otitis media.
From the patient record, we can identify the history elements as
follows:
History
Elements
Patient Record
CC:
Earache in the right ear
HPI:
Complaining of pain in the right ear with a severity of 8 of 10 for the past 2 days
Location:  Right ear
Quality:  Aching
Severity:  8 of 10
Duration:  Two days
PFSH:
Health history reviewed. (The patient information form completed by the mother contains the information that
the physician reviewed, along with questions to the patient.)
ROS:
Ears (one organ system)
In this case, the physician focused on the chief complaint and did a
brief history centered on gathering information about the present
illness. Referring to the description of history levels summarized in
Fig. 11-5
 or discussed in the E/M Guidelines, answer the following
question:
a 
What is the history level for this case?
_______________________________________________________________
Now let’s establish the level of examination:
Examination
Patient Record
General Survey:
Child appears to be in only minor distress
Vital Signs:
Temperature, 101° F
Body Areas/Organ Systems
Ears (one organ system)
In this case, the physician focused on constitutional (temperature
and general appearance) and one organ system (ears). Referring to
the description of examination levels summarized in 
Fig. 11-6
 or
discussed in the E/M Guidelines, answer the following question:
b 
What is the examination level for this case?
___________________________________________________________
That wasn’t so difficult, was it? Okay, now you do one.
Read the following patient record:
22 
A 68-year-old female established patient presents to the office
today with a “cold” of 9 days’ duration. Patient reports that she has
had a dry, hacking cough and nasal congestion for the past 6 days
and a fever for the past 3 days. She states that she is unable to sleep
due to the cough, fever, and aching. She appears to be in minor
distress. Personal and family history are negative for respiratory
problems. Temperature is 100° F; blood pressure 150/90; pulse 93
and regular. Lungs clear to percussion and auscultation.
Examination of head and ears, normal; nose, mucous membranes
inflamed with postnasal phlegm. Diagnosis: Sinusitis. Plan: Patient
was advised to drink fluids, take aspirin as needed for pain, obtain
bed rest, and to return if symptoms have not improved in 5 days.
Locate the information in the patient record that matches the
history element and place the information on the lines provided:
History Elements
Patient Record
CC:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
HPI:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
PFSH:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
ROS:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
With the information you placed on the preceding lines, choose the
correct history level:
a 
What is the history level for this case?
___________________________________________________
Locate the information in the patient record that matches the
examination, and place the information on the lines provided:
Examination
Patient Record
General Survey:
_________________________________________________________________
Vital Signs:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
Body Areas/Organ Systems:
_________________________________________________________________
With the information you placed on the preceding lines, choose the
correct examination level:
b 
What is the examination level for this case?
______________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Medical decision making. 
The key component of medical decision making (MDM) is based on
the complexity of the decision the physician must make about the
patient’s diagnosis and care. Complexity of decision making is based
on three elements:
1. 
Number of diagnoses or management options. The options can be
minimal, limited, multiple, or extensive.
2. 
Amount and/or complexity of data to review. The data can be
minimal or none, limited, moderate, or extensive.
3. 
Risk of complication or death if the condition goes untreated. Risk
can be minimal, low, moderate, or high.
Levels. 
The extent to which each of these elements is considered determines
the levels of MDM complexity.
Medical decision-making complexity levels
■
 
Straightforward
■
 
Low
■
 
Moderate
■
 
High
1. 
Straightforward decision making:
 minimal diagnosis and
management options, minimal or none for the amount and complexity
of data to be reviewed, and minimal risk to the patient of
complications or death if untreated.
2. 
Low-complexity decision making:
 limited number of diagnoses
and management options, limited data to be reviewed, and low risk to
the patient of complications or death if untreated.
3. 
Moderate-complexity decision making:
 multiple diagnoses and
management options, moderate amount and complexity of data to be
reviewed, and moderate risk to the patient of complications or death if
untreated.
4. 
High-complexity decision making:
 extensive diagnoses and
management options, extensive amount and complexity of data to be
reviewed, and high risk to the patient for complications or death if the
problem is untreated.
Management options. 
According to the 1995 E/M Documentation Guidelines, documentation
of management options in the medical record is as follows:
1. 
For each encounter, an assessment, clinical impression, or diagnosis
should be documented. It may be explicitly stated or implied in
documented decisions regarding management plans or further
evaluation.
■
 
For a presenting problem with an established
diagnosis, the record should reflect whether the
problem is (a) improved, well controlled,
resolving, or resolved; or (b) inadequately
controlled, worsening, or failing to change as
expected.
■
 
For a presenting problem without an
established diagnosis, the assessment or clinical
impression may be stated in the form of
differential diagnoses or as a “possible,”
“probable,” or “rule out” (R/O) diagnosis.
■
 
Note: Physician/Provider coders do not code
“rule out,” “possible,” or “probable” diagnosis;
rather they code the presenting symptoms
and/or complaints unless there is a definitive
diagnosis rendered.
2. 
The initiation of, or changes in, treatment should be documented.
Treatment includes a wide range of management options, including
patient instructions, nursing instructions, therapies, and medications.
3. 
If referrals are made, consultations requested, or advice sought, the
record should indicate to whom or where the referral or consultation
has been made or from whom the advice is requested.
Data to be reviewed. 
The following are some basic documentation guidelines for the
amount and complexity of data to be reviewed:
1. 
If a diagnostic service (test or procedure) is ordered, planned,
scheduled, or performed at the time of the E/M encounter, the type of
service (e.g., laboratory or radiology) should be documented.
2. 
The review of laboratory, radiology, or other diagnostic tests should
be documented. An entry in a progress note such as “WBC elevated”
or “chest x-ray negative” is acceptable. Alternatively, the review may
be documented by initialing and dating the report containing the test
results.
3. 
A decision to obtain old records or to obtain additional history from
the family, caregiver, or other source to supplement that obtained
from the patient should be documented.
4. 
Relevant findings from the review of old records or the receipt of
additional history from the family, caregiver, or other source should
be documented. If there is no relevant information beyond that
already obtained, that fact should be documented. A notation of “old
records reviewed” or “additional history obtained from family”
without elaboration is insufficient.
5. 
The results of discussion of laboratory, radiology, or other
diagnostic tests with the physician who performed or interpreted the
study should be documented.
6. 
The direct visualization and independent interpretation of an
image, tracing, or specimen previously interpreted by another
physician should be documented.
Risk. 
Some basic documentation guidelines for risk of significant
complications, morbidity, or mortality include the following:
1. 
Comorbidities (secondary conditions), underlying diseases, or other
factors that increase the complexity of medical decision making by
increasing the risk of complications, morbidity, or mortality should be
documented.
2. 
If a surgical or invasive diagnostic procedure is ordered, planned,
or scheduled at the time of the E/M encounter, the type of procedure
(e.g., laparoscopy) should be documented.
3. 
If a surgical or invasive diagnostic procedure is performed at the
time of the E/M encounter, the specific procedure should be
documented.
4. 
The referral for or decision to perform a surgical or invasive
diagnostic procedure on an urgent basis should be documented or
implied.
Examples of the levels of risk
 may be found in 
Table 11-1
.
Table 11–1
LEVELS OF RISK
Level of
Risk
Presenting Problem or Problems
Minimal
(Level 1)
One self-limited or minor problem (e.g., insect bite, tinea corporis)
Low
(Level 2)
Two or more self-limited or minor problems
One stable chronic illness (e.g., well-controlled hypertension or non-insulin dependent diabetes, cataract, benign
prostatic hypertrophy)
Acute, uncomplicated illness or injury (e.g., cystitis, allergic rhinitis, simple sprain)
Moderate
(Level 3)
One or more chronic illnesses with mild exacerbation, progression, or side effects of treatment
Two or more stable chronic illnesses
Undiagnosed new problem with uncertain prognosis (e.g., lump in breast)
Acute illness with systemic symptoms (e.g., pyelonephritis, pneumonitis, colitis)
High
(Level 4)
One or more chronic illnesses with severe exacerbation, progression, or side effects of treatment
Acute or chronic illnesses or injuries that pose a threat to life or body function (e.g., multiple trauma, acute
myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolus, severe respiratory distress, progressive severe rheumatoid arthritis,
psychiatric illness with potential threat to self or others, peritonitis, acute renal failure)
An abrupt change in neurologic status (e.g., seizure, transient ischemic attack, weakness, or sensory loss)
When you select one of the four types of complexity of medical
decision making—straightforward, low, moderate, or high—the
documentation in the medical record must support the selection in
terms of the number of diagnoses or management options, amount
and/or complexity of data to be reviewed, and risks. Two of the three
elements in 
Fig. 11-7
 must be met or exceeded to qualify for a level of
medical decision making.
FIGURE 11–7
Decision making elements required for each level of
medical decision making complexity. Two of the three elements must
be met or exceeded to qualify for a level of medical decision making.
Refer to 
Fig. 11-7
 for an overview of medical decision making.
Given the information in the medical record, you would consider the
information in the context of the complexity of the diagnosis and
management options, data to be reviewed, and risks to the patient in
order to choose the complexity of MDM. Let’s look at an example of
choosing the MDM level.
 
CODING SHOT
When selecting an MDM level, the choice is the majority. For
example, if the number of diagnosis management options is a level 2,
the amount of data is a level 2, but the risk is a level 1, the MDM level
is 2. Another example is if the number of management options is a
level 1, the amount of data is a level 3, and the risk is a level 2, the
MDM is a level 2. This is different than the history in which the
lowest level directed the level choice; in the MDM the level is the
highest two.
Example 1
An established patient’s outpatient medical record indicates the
following: Female patient fell and scraped arm; problem focused
history and examination were done. The patient states that she
slipped on the ice on the walk outside her home approximately 3
hours earlier. The area of abrasion appears to be relatively clean, with
no foreign materials imbedded. There appears to be only minimal
cutaneous damage. The area was washed and a dressing applied.
1. 
Diagnosis and management options
 for an abrasion (clean and
dress). (Options are minimal, limited, multiple, or extensive.)
As a coder, you think about how many various
options are open to the physician to diagnose
the problem and decide how to manage this
patient’s care—minimal, limited, multiple,
extensive? The management of an abrasion is
fairly clear—clean and dress the wound;
therefore, the diagnosis and management
options are minimal.
2. 
Data to review
 to provide service. (Data can be minimal/none,
limited, moderate, or extensive.)
Think about how much and how complex the
information (data) would be that the physician
must obtain, review, and analyze to care for this
patient—minimal/none, limited, moderate, or
extensive? The amount of data to review would
be minimal/none for an abrasion.
3. 
Risk
 if not treated. (Risk can be minimal, low, moderate, or high.)
As a coder, you think about how great a risk there
is that the patient would die or encounter
severe complications (e.g., infection), morbidity
(additional diseases such as gangrene), or
mortality (death) if the abrasion was not treated
—minimal, low, moderate, or high? The risk of
death or of complications is minimal.
The diagnosis and management options are minimal, data are
minimal/none, and risk is minimal. Consideration of these three
elements has placed this patient’s care into a straightforward MDM
complexity level.
The history level is stated to be problem focused and the
examination level is problem focused. The patient was an established
patient seen as an outpatient. Carefully look at each of the items set in
boldface type in code 99212 below. The place of service, type of
service, type of history, type of examination, and complexity level of
the MDM are identified in the description of the code.
99212
Office or other outpatient
 visit for the evaluation and management of an 
established patient
 that requires at least two
of these three key components:
• 
a problem focused history
• 
a problem focused examination
• 
straightforward medical decision making
CPT code 99212 is the correct code for this service.
Example 2
The patient’s record states the following: Unknown (new) patient
presenting to the office with chest pain (R07.9). A comprehensive
history was taken and a comprehensive examination performed. The
physician ordered an electrocardiogram (ECG), laboratory reports,
and x-rays.
The MDM complexity level must be chosen:
1. 
Diagnosis and management options
 for a cardiac origin could be
myocardial infarction, angina, or heart block. Gastrointestinal origin
could be reflux or an ulcer. Respiratory origin could be a pulmonary
embolism or pleuritis. (Diagnosis and management options can be
minimal, limited, multiple, or extensive.)
What do you think it would take for the physician to decide on the
diagnosis or management options for this patient? There are many
possibilities of origin for the chest pain; therefore, the diagnosis and
management options are extensive.
2. 
Data to review
 in order for the physician to provide service. (Data
can be minimal/none, limited, moderate, or extensive.) How much
data would the physician have to obtain through current tests and
how much review and analysis of previous records would be
necessary to provide services to the patient—minimal/none, limited,
moderate, extensive? In this case, the patient’s care requires
moderate data review, including laboratory reports, radiology
reports, and ECG. You very well may have chosen the data review
level of extensive rather than moderate and that is acceptable. Once
you are in the medical office and have the patient’s full medical
record available to review, the choice of the amount of data that was
reviewed becomes easier to identify.
3. 
Risk
 if left untreated. (Risk can be minimal, low, moderate, or high.)
If the patient’s condition was not treated, what do you think the risk
of death or serious complication would be—minimal, low,
moderate, or high? This patient would have a high risk of death or
severe complications if this condition was left untreated.
The extensive diagnosis and management options and high risk to
the patient mean that two of the three elements have been met. So this
patient’s care is considered to have a high level of MDM complexity.
A new patient with a comprehensive history and examination
together with a high MDM complexity assigns this case to code 99205.
EXERCISE 11-5
Medical Decision-Making Complexity
A new patient’s record states that an initial office visit was made for
the evaluation and management of a 48-year-old male with recurrent
low back pain from a herniated disc, with pain radiating to the leg
(myelopathy). A detailed history and a detailed examination were
performed.
Using the information above, identify the following factors in the
case:
1 
Diagnosis and management options for recurrent low back pain
radiating to the leg. (Options can be minimal, limited, multiple, or
extensive.)
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
Data to review in order to provide service. (Data can be
minimal/none, limited, moderate, or extensive.) Only the current
record is available.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
3 
Risk if left untreated. (Risk can be minimal, low, moderate, or high.)
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
4 
Two of the three elements have been met to qualify this patient for
what level of MDM complexity? (Complexity can be
straightforward, low, moderate, or high.)
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
5 
The patient record indicates that a detailed history was taken and a
detailed examination was performed. When this is combined with
the level of MDM complexity you arrived at for this patient, what is
the correct CPT code for the case?
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
Now, let’s look again at two cases for which you previously
established the history and examination levels:
6 
A new patient, an 8-year-old female, is brought into the office by her
mother, who states that the child has an earache in the right ear.
Mother reports that the child has been complaining of pain in right
ear with a severity of 8 of 10 for the past 2 days. Child appears to be
in only minor distress. Temperature, 101° F. Tympanic membranes
red, fluid noted in right ear. Health history reviewed. Diagnosis:
Acute serous otitis media.
What is the MDM level for this patient?
___________________
What diagnosis code would be reported for this
patient?
ICD-10-CM Code: ___________________
7 
A 68-year-old female established patient presents to the office today
with a “cold” of 9 days’ duration. Patient reports that she has had a
dry, hacking cough and nasal congestion for the past 6 days and a
fever for the past 3 days. She states that she is unable to sleep due to
the cough, fever, and aching. She appears to be in minor distress.
Personal and family history are negative for respiratory problems.
Temperature is 100° F; blood pressure 150/90; pulse 93 and regular.
Lungs clear to percussion and auscultation. Examination of head
and ears, normal; nose, mucous membranes inflamed with
postnasal phlegm. Diagnosis: Acute sinusitis. Plan: Patient was
advised to drink fluids, take aspirin as needed for pain, obtain bed
rest, and return if symptoms have not improved in 5 days.
What is the MDM level for this patient?
___________________
What diagnosis code would be reported for this
patient?
ICD-10-CM Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
There is certainly a great amount of information that must be
considered in order to choose the correct E/M code! Only with practice
can you expect to remember all of the various elements and levels
within each component. Each medical facility has its own procedure
for identifying the level of E/M service; some facilities require the
physician to identify all the components of service, whereas other
facilities require the component information to be abstracted from the
medical record by support personnel. Either way, you need to be
knowledgeable about all components of E/M codes, and it really does
get easier with practice!
 
From the Trenches
“I tell people that while the study and practice of medicine is considered a
science, the coding is an art. There are often varying ways to do things,
dependent on different circumstances. Attention to detail is important, but
flexibility is also necessary.”
Joan
 
STOP 
You have examined each of the three key components and seen how they
apply to the assignment of an E/M code. You will be referring to the
information as you are presented with additional cases. Make note of the
important points and remember that the information about the key
components is in the E/M Guidelines in the CPT manual.
Now that you are familiar with the key components of history,
examination, and medical decision making, let’s review the
contributory factors.
Contributory factors
There are three contributory factors: counseling, coordination of care,
and the nature of the presenting problem. Contributory factors are
those conditions that help the physician determine the extent of the
history, examination, and decision making (key components)
necessary to treat the patient. Contributory factors may or may not be
considered in every patient case.
Contributory factors
■
 
Counseling
■
 
Coordination of care
■
 
Nature of presenting problem
Counseling. 
Counseling is a service that physicians provide to patients and their
families. It involves discussion of diagnostic results, impressions, and
recommended diagnostic studies; prognosis; risks and benefits of
treatment; instructions for treatment; importance of compliance with
treatment; risk factor reduction; and patient and family education.
Some form of counseling usually takes place in all physician-patient
encounters, and this was factored into the codes when they were
developed by the AMA. Only when counseling is the reason for the
encounter or consumes most of the visit time (more than 50% of the
total time) is counseling considered a component of code assignment.
The following statement is made often within the codes in the E/M
section:
Counseling and/or coordination of care with other physicians, other
qualified health care professionals or agencies are provided consistent with
the nature of the problem(s) and the patient’s and/or family’s needs.
Coordination of care. 
Coordination of care with other health care providers or agencies may
be necessary for the care of a patient. In coordination of care, a
physician might arrange for other services to be provided to the
patient, such as arrangements for admittance to a long-term nursing
facility.
Nature of the presenting problem. 
This is the foundation of the level assigned. The presenting problem is
the patient’s chief complaint or the situation that leads the physician
to determining the level of care necessary to diagnose and treat the
patient. The CPT describes the 
presenting problem
 as a disease,
condition, illness, injury, symptom, sign, finding, complaint, or other
reason for the encounter, with or without a diagnosis being
established at the time of the encounter. There are five types of
presenting problems:
■
 
Minimal
■
 
Self-limited
■
 
Low severity
■
 
Moderate severity
■
 
High severity
1. 
Minimal:
 A problem may not require the presence of the physician,
but a service is provided under the physician’s supervision. A
minimal problem is a blood pressure reading, a dressing change, or
another service that can be performed without the physician being
immediately present.
2. 
Self-limited:
 Also called a minor presenting problem, a self-limited
problem runs a definite and prescribed course, is transient (it comes
and goes), and is not likely to permanently alter health status, or the
presenting problem has a good prognosis with management and
compliance.
3. 
Low severity:
 The risk of complete sickness (morbidity) without
treatment is low, there is little or no risk of death without treatment,
and full recovery without impairment is expected.
4. 
Moderate severity:
 The risk of complete sickness (morbidity)
without treatment is moderate, there is moderate risk of death
without treatment, and an uncertain prognosis or increased
probability of impairment exists.
5. 
High severity:
 The risk of complete sickness (morbidity) without
treatment is high to extreme, there is a moderate to high risk of death
without treatment, or there is a strong probability of severe,
prolonged functional impairment.
The patient’s medical record should contain the physician’s
observation concerning the complexity of the presenting problem(s).
Your responsibility is to identify the words that correctly indicate the
type of presenting problem.
Direct face-to-face
 and 
unit/floor time
 are two measures of time.
Outpatient visits are measured as direct face-to-face time. Direct face-
to-face time is the time a physician spends directly with a patient
during an office visit obtaining the history, performing an
examination, and discussing the results. Inpatient time is measured as
unit/floor time and is used to describe the time a physician spends in
the hospital setting dealing with the patient’s care. Unit/floor time
includes care given to the patient at the bedside as well as at other
settings on the unit or floor (e.g., the nursing station). It is an often-
heard comment that physicians get paid a great deal of money just for
stopping in to see a hospitalized patient. However, what is not
realized is that the physician spends additional time reviewing the
patient’s records, test results, and writing orders for the patient’s care.
Time in the E/M section is referred to in statements such as this one
that is located with code 99203:
Usually, the presenting problem(s) are of moderate severity. Typically, 25
minutes are spent face to face with the patient and/or family.
These statements concerning time are used when counseling and/or
coordination of care represent more than 
50% of the time spent with
a patient.
 The times referred to in these statements are the basis of the
selection of the E/M code. For example: An established patient returns
for an office visit to get the results of tests. The physician spends 25
minutes going over the unfavorable results of the tests. The physician
discusses various treatment options, the prognosis, and the risks of
treatment and of treatment refusal. The correct code would be 99214,
in which the time statement is, “Typically, 25 minutes are spent face to
face with the patient and/or family.” The physician must either
document the beginning and ending time in the patient’s medical
record or document the total time spent and how much was spent in
counseling in order to be able to consider time in the code
assignments.
 
CAUTION 
Time was not included in the CPT manual before 1992 but was incorporated
to assist with the selection of the most appropriate level of E/M services. The
times indicated with the codes are only
 
averages
 
and represent a simple
estimate of the possible duration of a service.
EXERCISE 11-6
Presenting Problem
Match the presenting problem to the severity level in the patient:
a
 minimal 
b
 self-limited 
c
 low 
d
 moderate 
e
 high
1
 Four-year-old female established patient presents with slight pain in
right ear, of 2 days’ duration. Physician diagnosed a minor infection
and prescribed antibiotic for acute exudative otitis media.
Level of Presenting Problem: _____
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Eighty-six-year-old woman who has a history of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and is oxygen-dependent comes in
because of dizziness and weakness. Diagnosis is acute exacerbation
of COPD.
Level of Presenting Problem: _____
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
___________________
3
 Established patient, 71 years old, with shortness of breath on
exertion and a history of congestive cardiomyopathy.
Level of Presenting Problem: _____
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________ (shortness
of breath), ________________ (cardiomyopathy,
congestive)
4 
Fourteen-year-old presents with moderate pain in left thumb after a
fall from his skateboard. Diagnosis is sprain of left thumb.
Level of Presenting Problem: _____
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________ (sprain),
_________________ (external cause),
________________ (activity)
5 
Established patient, 34 years old, presents for a blood pressure check
due to her malignant hypertension.
Level of Presenting Problem: _____
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
Physician recommends an over-the-counter medication for patient
with seasonal grass allergic reaction.
Level of Presenting Problem: _____
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
An E/M code example
With the CPT manual open to the first page of the E/M section, locate
the notes above the 99201 code. These notes highlight the incidents in
which codes in that particular category are appropriate for
assignment. The notes above 99201 indicate that the codes that follow
the notes are appropriate for use in coding services provided in a
“physician’s office or in an outpatient or other ambulatory facility.”
The information also directs you to other code subsections if the
patient classification is not correct. As an example of this directional
feature, the notes above 99201 state, “For services provided in the
emergency department, see 99281-99285.”
Fig. 11-8
 shows the first code for a new patient under the category
New Patient under subsection Office or Other Outpatient Services.
Review 
Fig. 11-8
 carefully before continuing. Note the location of each
important piece of information.
FIGURE 11–8
Code information.
Locate the following items in 
Fig. 11-8
:
1. 
Three key components
2. 
Three contributory factors
3. 
Number of key components required
4. 
Place of service
5. 
Category by patient status
6. 
Code
Using the E/M codes
Now you are going to use the information you have learned about
codes in the E/M services section as you continue to identify the
differences among the codes.
Office and other outpatient services
New patient. 
The first subsection in the E/M section is Office and Other Outpatient
Services, New Patient Category (99201-99205).
You will recall from information presented earlier that a new
patient is defined as one who has not received professional services
from the physician or another physician of the exact same specialty
and subspecialty in the same group within the past 3 years. A
physician must spend more time with a new patient—obtaining the
history, conducting the examination, and considering the data—than
with an established patient. Consider that the established patient is
probably known to the physician, and the person’s medical records
are available, but with a new patient none of this is available to the
physician. For these reasons, the cost of a new patient office visit is
higher, so third-party payers reimburse the physician at a higher rate
for new patient services than for the same type of service when it is
provided to an established patient.
EXERCISE 11-7
New Patient Services
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, fill in the blanks with the
correct words:
1 
For code 99203, the history level is ____________, the examination is
____________, and the MDM is of _____________ complexity.
2 
For code 99204, the history level is ____________, the examination is
____________, and the MDM complexity is ____________.
3 
For code 99205, the history level is ____________, the examination is
____________, and the MDM complexity is ____________.
Code the following cases for new patients:
4 
A 53-year-old new patient presents for an initial office visit to
discuss a surgical vasectomy for sterilization. The history and
examination are detailed and the MDM is of low complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
5 
A 4-year-old new patient presents for the removal of sutures from
an appendectomy incision made 10 days earlier in another city. The
physician conducts a brief history and examination prior to
removing the stitches.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
A 23-year-old man who is a new patient has an initial office visit for
severe depression 
(report as first-listed diagnosis)
 that has led to
frequent thoughts of suicide in the past several weeks and is acute
today. More than an hour is spent discussing the patient’s problems
and options. Past medical history is negative. The social history
reveals that the patient suffers from sleeplessness 
(report as an
additional diagnosis);
 smokes between two and two and a half packs
of unfiltered cigarettes a day and has for 5 years 
(report as tobacco
abuse);
 drinks 10 to 12 cups of coffee; and denies current use of
drugs. (The actual patient record continues and indicates that a
comprehensive history and examination was conducted; high MDM
complexity.)
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________,
________________
7 
A new patient, a 10-year-old boy, is brought in by his father for a
knee injury sustained in a hockey game. The knee is swollen and the
patient is in apparent pain. A detailed history and examination are
obtained. A diagnosis of medial collateral sprain of the right knee is
made. Low MDM complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
8 
A 41-year-old woman, new to the office, complains of headache and
rhinitis of 4 days’ duration. The patient states that she has had a
problem with her allergies during this season for years. An
expanded problem-focused history and examination are done.
Straightforward MDM complexity. The diagnosis was grass pollen
allergy.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Established patient. 
The second category of codes in subsection Office and Other
Outpatient Services is for the established patient in an outpatient
setting (99211-99215). You will recall that the definition of an
established patient is one who has received professional services from
the physician or another physician of the exact same specialty and
subspecialty in the same group within the past 3 years.
Code 99211 reports services provided in the office and for which the
physician may not be present during the service but is in the office
suite and is immediately available. Further, the employee providing
the service must have the credentials necessary to provide the service,
and the service must be part of a documented treatment plan. The
physician should sign the documentation of the service.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-4
1. 
Could a physician assign 99211 to report a patient encounter?
Yes or No?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 11-8
Established Patient Services
Fill in the blanks with information from codes in the Established
Patient category:
1 
99211: This minimal service level does not exist in the New Patient
category because a new patient is seen by the physician. The
established patient may or may not be seen by the physician. Read
the description and information for code 99211 in the CPT manual.
Would an established patient returning for a simple blood pressure
check be appropriately reported as 99211? ____________
2 
A 42-year-old established patient presents for an office visit with
complaints of severe vaginal itching and moderate pain. During the
expanded problem focused history, the patient states that several
weeks earlier she had noted a slight itching, which has increased in
severity. Yesterday, she noted a lesion on her genitalia. Burning and
painful urination have increased over the past 5 days accompanied
by rectal itching. She has tried a variety of over-the-counter
ointments and creams, which induced no improvement. The patient
states that she has had several yeast infections in the past that had
been successfully treated by her previous physician. Personal
history indicates several prior urinary infections. No discharge
noted. A problem focused examination of the external genitalia
reveals a lesion, which had previously ruptured, located on the
vulva. Bacterial and viral smears are done. The MDM complexity is
straightforward. The patient is advised that the smears would be
back in 24 hours and that a treatment plan would be developed
based on the reports. (The smear was positive for a bacterial
infection, for which antibiotics were prescribed.)
CPT Code: ___________________
3 
A 17-year-old football player comes to the clinic for a 50 mg gold
injection for a left anterior cruciate knee sprain that occurred last
week. The injection was given by the nurse. Only the nurse sees this
established patient. (Code only the E/M service and diagnosis.)
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
A 53-year-old established patient complains of frequent fainting.
The history and examination are comprehensive, and the MDM is of
high complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
5 
A 61-year-old established patient is seen for medication
management of malaise and fatigue produced by hypertensive
medication. An expanded problem focused history and examination
are done, and the MDM is of moderate complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________,
________________
6 
An established 31-year-old patient presents with an irritated infected
skin tag. A problem focused history and examination are done.
MDM complexity is low.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
7 
An established 48-year-old woman has had diarrhea for the past 5
days. Her temperature is 101° F. An expanded problem focused
history and examination are done. MDM complexity is low.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Remember, it takes a lot of practice to learn to code. It is not a skill
that is quickly acquired. You need to have patience and know that
practice, practice, practice is the only thing that will make this skill
yours.
Hospital observation services
The codes in the Hospital Observation subsection (99217-99226)
identify initial observation care, subsequent observation care, or
observation discharge services. The services in the observation
subsection are for patients who are in a hospital on observation status.
Observation
 is a status used for the classification of a patient who
does not have an illness severe enough to meet acute inpatient criteria
and does not require resources as intensive as an inpatient but does
require hospitalization for a short period of time. Patients are also
admitted to observation so further information can be obtained about
the severity of the condition and to determine whether the patient can
be treated on an outpatient basis. In some hospitals in some parts of
the country, observation status is conducted in the temporary care
unit (TCU). Generally observation status can be designated anywhere
in the hospital; however, the patient is considered an outpatient.
The observation codes are for new or established patients. Each
code from the range 99218-99220 requires all three of the key
components to establish a level of service.
If a patient is admitted to the hospital as an inpatient after having
been admitted earlier the same day as an observation patient, you do
not report the observation status separately. The services provided
during observation become part of (are bundled into) the initial
inpatient hospital admission code.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-5
1. 
Are observation codes 99218-99220 and 99224-99226 reported for
inpatient or outpatient services? _______________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Observation care discharge services. 
The Observation Care Discharge Services code (99217) includes the
final examination of the patient upon discharge from observation
status. Discussion of the hospital stay, instructions for continued care,
and preparation of discharge records are also bundled into the
Observation Care Discharge Services code. The code is used only with
patients who are discharged on a day that follows the first day of
observation.
Initial observation care. 
Initial Observation Care codes (99218-99220) designate the beginning
of observation status in a hospital. Again, the hospital does not need
to have a formal observation area, since the designation of observation
status is dependent on the severity of illness of the patient. These
codes also include development of a care plan for the patient and
periodic reassessment while on observation status. Observation
admission can be reported only for the first day of the service. If the
patient is admitted and discharged on the same day, a code from the
range 99234-99236, Observation or Inpatient Care Services, is assigned
to report the service. If the patient is in the hospital overnight but
remains there for a period that is 
less than 48 hours,
 the first day’s
service is reported with a code from the range 99218-99220, Initial
Observation Care, and the second day’s service is coded 99217,
Observation Care Discharge Services. If the patient is on observation
status for 
longer than 48 hours,
 the first day is reported with a code
from the range 99218-99220, Initial Observation Care; the second day
is reported with a code from the 
range 99224-99226, Subsequent
Observation Care; and the third day is coded 99217, Observation Care
Discharge Services.
Services performed in sites other than the observation area (e.g.,
clinic, nursing home, emergency department) and that precede
admission to observation status are included in (bundled into) the
Initial Observation Care codes and are not to be reported separately.
For example, an established patient was seen in the physician’s
office for frequent fainting of unknown origin. The history and
examination were comprehensive and the MDM complexity was
moderate. The code for the office visit would be 99215. But the
physician decided to admit the patient immediately to observation
status until a further determination could be made as to the origin of
the fainting. You would assign a code from the Hospital Observation
Services subsection, Initial Observation Care subheading, to report the
physician’s service of admission to observation status (99219) and
would not separately report the office visit (99215).
 
CAUTION 
Observation or Inpatient Care Services (including admission and discharge
service), codes 99234-99236, have a very specific purpose: to report services
for a patient who is admitted to and discharged from observation or inpatient
status on the
 
same day
. 
All the services provided to the patient—same-day
office services, observation care, and discharge—are bundled into one code
from the 99234-99236 range.
CMS RULES
When reporting physician services (99234-99236), Medicare requires a
patient to be admitted to observation status for 
more than 8 hours
and discharged on the same date of service. A period of 8 hours or
less is reimbursed as initial observation status (99218-99220), even if
the patient is discharged on the same date.
EXERCISE 11-9
Hospital Observation Services
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A patient was in an automobile accident and is complaining of a
minor headache and no other apparent injuries. History gathered
from bystanders states that patient was not wearing a seat belt and
hit his head on the windshield. A 15-minute loss of consciousness
was noted. The patient was diagnosed with a concussion. The
patient was then admitted for 24-hour observation to rule out head
injury. A comprehensive history and examination were performed.
The MDM was of moderate complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
If a patient is admitted to observation status and then becomes ill
enough to be admitted to the hospital, an Initial Hospital Care code
(99221-99223), not an observation code, is assigned to report services.
Subsequent observation care. 
Subsequent observation services are reported with codes in the 99224-
99226 range. The codes report the physician’s services for day 2 to the
date of discharge. The code assignment is based on the documented
level of at least two of the three key components (history,
examination, and complexity of medical decision making). These
codes indicate the time the physician typically spends providing the
service. (Note that these are resequenced codes.)
Hospital inpatient services
Hospital Inpatient Services codes (99221-99239) report a patient’s
status as an inpatient in a hospital or partial hospital setting and,
therefore, identify the hospital setting as the place where the
physician renders service to the patient. An 
inpatient
 is one who has
been formally admitted to an acute health care facility.
Note that within the subsection Hospital Inpatient Services, all the
subheadings 
except
 Hospital Discharge Services are divided on the
basis of the three key components of history, examination, and MDM
complexity. Further, within this subsection only Subsequent Hospital
Care codes do not require all three key components to be at the level
described in the code. For example, the key components for code
99222 are a comprehensive history, a comprehensive examination, and
a moderate level of MDM complexity. If the case you are coding has a
comprehensive history and a comprehensive examination but a low
complexity of MDM, you cannot assign code 99222 to the case;
instead, you would have to assign the lower level code of 99221,
which has a low complexity of MDM because the codes require three
of the three key components to assign the code to a service.
The subsection of Hospital Inpatient Services is divided into two
subheadings.
1. 
Initial Hospital Care
2. 
Subsequent Hospital Care
Initial hospital care. 
Initial Hospital Care codes are used to report the initial service of
admission to the hospital by the 
admitting physician.
 Only the
admitting physician can report the Initial Hospital Care codes. These
codes reflect services in any setting (office, emergency department,
nursing home) that are provided in conjunction with the admission to
the hospital. For example, if the patient is seen in the office and
subsequently is admitted to the hospital the same day, the office visit
is bundled into the initial hospital care service. All services provided
in the office may be taken into account when selecting the appropriate
level of hospital admission. This means that if the physician
performed a comprehensive examination in the office, that level of
examination is considered when determining the level of the hospital
admission service.
EXERCISE 11-10
Initial Hospital Care
Fill in the missing words or codes for the following:
1 
Which Initial Hospital Care code has a comprehensive history with a
straightforward or low complexity of MDM?
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
Which code has a time component of 70 minutes?
CPT Code: ___________________
3 
Code 99222 has a ____________ history and examination level and a
____________ MDM complexity.
4 
An 80-year-old woman has inflammation of the kidneys and renal
pelvic area. She is complaining of hematuria, dysuria, and pyuria.
She is in good general health other than this condition. She has had
some previous workup for this condition as an outpatient but is
now being admitted for a cystoscopy. In the patient’s history, the
physician noted the patient’s chief complaints and described the
bright red nature of the hematuria, the severe discomfort associated
with the dysuria, including burning and itching, and her other
symptoms of frequency and urgency. The patient had stated that
her symptoms had begun gradually over the past 2 weeks but had
become more intense in the past 48 hours. The physician
documented the patient’s positive responses and pertinent negative
responses in his review of her cardiovascular, respiratory,
genitourinary, musculoskeletal, neurologic, and endocrine systems.
Her past history relating to urinary and renal problems was
reviewed. The physical examination noted the complete findings
relative to her reproductive system as well as to her urinary system.
An examination of her back and related musculoskeletal structures
was included because she complained of mild back pain as well.
After completing the detailed history and examination, the
physician concluded with a diagnosis of acute cystitis and acute
pyelitis, possibly associated with endometritis. The MDM
complexity was low. The patient was reassured and told to expect a
short stay once the exact problem was pinpointed.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Subsequent hospital care. 
Subsequent Hospital Care (99231-99233) is the second subheading of
codes in the Hospital Inpatient Services subsection. The Subsequent
Hospital Care codes are used by physicians to report daily hospital
visits while the patient is hospitalized.
The first Subsequent Hospital Care code is 99231. Typically, the
99231 level implies that the patient is in stable condition and is
responding well to treatment. Subsequent codes in the subsection
indicate (in the “Usually, the patient...” area) the status of the patient,
such as stable/unstable or recovering/unresponding. Be certain to read
the contributory factors area for each code in this subheading.
A general rule of thumb for subsequent hospital services is as
follows:
■
 
Level 1 The patient is recovering and improving.
■
 
Level 2 The patient has a minor complication or inadequate
response to the current therapy.
■
 
Level 3 The patient is unstable, has a significant complication, or has
developed a new problem.
The patient’s medical record should indicate the patient’s progress
from the status indicated in the previous note.
Several physicians, of different specialties, can report the
subsequent care codes on the same day. This is called concurrent care.
Concurrent care
 is being provided when more than one physician
provides service to a patient on the same day for different conditions.
An example of concurrent care is a circumstance in which physician
A, a cardiologist, treats the patient for a heart condition and at the
same time physician B, an oncologist, treats the patient for a cancer
condition. The patient’s attending (admitting) physician maintains the
primary responsibility for the overall care of the patient, no matter
how many other physicians are providing services to the patient,
unless a formal transfer of care has occurred.
An 
attending physician
 is a doctor who, on the basis of education,
training, and experience, is granted medical staff membership and
clinical privileges by a health care organization to perform diagnostic
and therapeutic procedures in the facility. An attending physician is
legally responsible for the care and treatment provided to a patient.
The attending physician may be a patient’s personal physician or may
be a physician assigned to a patient who has been admitted to a
hospital through the emergency department. The attending physician
is usually a provider of primary care, such as a family practitioner,
internist, or pediatrician, but the attending physician may also be a
surgeon or another type of specialist. In an academic medical center,
the attending physician is a member of the academic or medical
school staff who is responsible for the supervision of medical
residents, interns, and medical school students and oversees the care
the residents, interns, or students provide to the patients.
 
CODING SHOT
Note that there is no comprehensive history or comprehensive
examination level in the codes in the Subsequent Hospital Care
subheading because the comprehensive level of service would have
been provided at the time of admission. Also note that only two of
the three key components must be met or exceeded to assign a
subsequent hospital code.
Observation or inpatient care services (including
admission and discharge services). 
Codes in the 99234-99236 range report services provided when the
patient is admitted and discharged on the 
same day
. For example,
when the patient is admitted to inpatient status from observation
status on the same date of service. Codes in this range require that all
three of the key components must be at or exceed the level stated in
the code description. These codes include both the admission service
and the discharge service. Bundled into the admission are services
that were provided in another location, such as the physician’s office,
nursing facility, or emergency department. This means that the
services provided in these other locations are considered when
assigning a code from the 99234-99236 range.
Hospital discharge services. 
Inpatient Hospital Discharge Services (99238, 99239) are reported on
the final day of services for a 
multiple-day
 stay in a hospital setting.
The service reflects the final examination of the patient as appropriate,
follow-up instructions to the patient, and arrangements for discharge,
including completion of discharge records. The codes are based on the
time spent by the physician in handling the final discharge of the
patient, and the time spent must be documented in the medical
record.
The Hospital Discharge Services codes are not assigned if the
physician is a consultant, unless the primary physician transfers
complete care to the consultant. If a consulting physician is following
the patient for a separate condition, those services would require a
subsequent 
hospital care code. Only the attending physician, not the
consultant, is responsible for completion of the final examination,
follow-up instructions, and arrangements for discharge and discharge
records. Because these additional services are included in the Hospital
Discharge codes, only the attending physician’s services can be
reported using the codes.
Code 99239, discharge management greater than 30 minutes,
requires documentation of time spent performing the discharge
instructions. If no indication of time is noted in the documentation,
the lowest level of discharge service is reported.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-6
1. 
What is the one criterion for selecting a hospital discharge day
management code? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 11-11
Hospital Discharge Services
Fill in the blanks:
1 
What are the times indicated for each of the Hospital Discharge
Services codes?
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
According to the category notes in Hospital Discharge Services, does
the time spent by the physician arranging for the final hospital
discharge of the patient have to be continuous?
_________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Consultation services
We all need advice once in a while—maybe for a problem or situation
that we cannot find a solution to. Perhaps we think we are doing the
right thing but want another person’s advice or view to make certain
we are following the best course of action. Physicians need opinions
and advice, too, and when they do, they ask another physician for an
opinion or advice on the treatment, diagnosis, or management of a
patient. The physician asking for the advice or opinion is making a
request for consultation
 and is the 
requesting
 physician. The
physician giving the advice is providing a consultation and is the
consultant.
 Consultations can be provided to both outpatients and
inpatients. The CPT manual has different codes for each of the two
types of patient consultation—outpatient and inpatient.
“Request for consultation” used to be termed “referral”; making a
referral means that the referring physician is asking for the advice or
opinion of another physician (a consultation). However, some third-
party payers have chosen to define 
referral
 to mean a total transfer of
the care of a patient. In other words, if a patient is referred by
physician A to physician B, physician A is expecting physician B to
evaluate and treat (assume care for) the patient for the condition for
which the patient is being referred. The services of physician B would
then 
not
 be reported using consultation codes. On the other hand, if
physician A makes a 
request for a consultation
 to physician B, it is
expected that physician B will provide physician A with his or her
advice or opinion and that the patient will return to physician A for
any necessary treatment. Physician B would then report his or her
services using consultation codes. Although these semantics (use of
words) may seem unimportant, they make a difference in the codes
you assigned to report the services.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-7
1. 
The criteria required to report a consultation include:
_____________ from the attending to the
consultant to see the patient, evaluation of the
patient by the consultant and a ____________
back to the attending of the findings and
recommendations of the consultant.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
In the Consultation subsection (99241-99255), there are two
subheadings of consultations:
1. 
Office or Other Outpatient Consultations
2. 
Inpatient Consultations
These subheadings define the location in which the service is
rendered; the patient is an outpatient or an inpatient.
Only one initial consultation is reported by a consultant for the
patient on each admission, and any subsequent service is reported
using codes from the Subsequent Hospital Care codes (99231-99233)
or Office or Other Outpatient Services, Established Patient (99211-
99215). If more than one consultation is ordered on an inpatient, each
consultant may report the initial consultation using the Inpatient
Consultation codes (99251-99255).
A 
consultation
 is a service provided by a physician whose opinion
or advice regarding the management or diagnosis of a specific
problem has been requested. The consultant provides a written report
of the opinion or advice to the attending physician and documents the
opinion and services provided in the medical record; the care of the
patient is thus complete. Sometimes the attending physician will
request the consultant to assume responsibility for a specific area of
the patient’s care. For example, a consultant may be asked by the
attending physician to see an inpatient regarding the care of the
patient’s diabetes while the patient is hospitalized for gallbladder
surgery. After the initial consultation, the attending physician may
ask the consultant to continue to monitor the patient’s diabetic
condition. The consultant assumes responsibility for management of
the patient in the specific area of diabetes. Subsequent visits made by
the consultant would then be reported using the codes from the
subheading Subsequent Hospital Care or Subsequent Nursing Facility
Care.
Documentation in the medical record for a consultation must show
a request from a physician for an opinion or the advice of a consultant
for a specific condition. Findings and treatments rendered during the
consultation must be documented in the medical record by the
consulting physician and communicated to the requesting physician.
The consulting physician can order tests and services for a patient, but
the medical necessity of all tests and services must be indicated in the
medical record.
Office or other outpatient consultations. 
The Office or Other Outpatient Consultations codes (99241-99245)
report consultative services provided to a patient in an office setting,
including hospital observation services, home services, custodial care,
and services that are provided in a domiciliary, rest home, or
emergency department. Outpatient consultations include
consultations provided in the emergency department because the
patient is considered an outpatient in the emergency department
setting. The codes are for both new and established patients. The
codes in this subsection are of increasing complexity, based on the
three key components and any contributory factors.
 
From the Trenches
“Keep the lines of communication open with fellow students, former
instructors, co-workers, and the medical staff for whom you code. If you can
establish yourself as someone who is dedicated to doing your work with
integrity, interacts with respect, and is always willing to help out, you will
be successful.”
Joan
Inpatient consultations. 
The codes in the Inpatient Consultations subheading (99251-99255)
report services by physicians in inpatient settings. This subheading is
used for both new and established patients and can be reported only
one time per patient admission, per consulting physician, per
specialty.
After the initial consultation report, the subsequent hospital or
nursing facility codes would be assigned to report services.
The office and inpatient consultation codes (99241-99255) require
documentation in the medical record to support all three of the key
components listed in the code description. For example, 99243, office
consultation, requires a detailed history and examination as well as a
low level of medical decision making complexity. Let’s say the
documentation indicated a detailed history and examination but only
a straightforward level of medical decision making. Code 99243 could
not be reported because only two of the three key components were at
the correct level. The lower level code, 99242, would be assigned.
Various people request consultations on a recommended treatment
or diagnosis. Insurance companies or other third-party payers may
request a consultation regarding a diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment
plan for a patient. These types of consultations are also reported based
on the location of the service—office or inpatient. If the consultation is
mandated, such as those required by an insurance company, add
modifier -32 (Mandated Service) to the code. This modifier is only
added if the consultation is mandated by an official body.
For office consultations, a written or verbal request stating results is
sent to the requesting physician. This is not necessary with an
inpatient because the physicians share the patient’s medical record
and the inpatient consultant would dictate a consultation report to be
included in the medical record.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-8
1. 
Can time be utilized to determine a consultation level of service
rather than the key components?
Yes or No?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
CMS rules
CMS no longer recognizes CPT consultation codes (ranges 99241-
99245 and 99251-99255) for Part B payment for office/outpatient and
inpatient facility settings.
EXERCISE 11-12
Consultation Services
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the visit in the
following scenarios:
1 
A 56-year-old female was sent at the request of her primary care
physician (PCP) to the oncologist for his opinion regarding the
treatment options. The patient had had a right breast carcinoma 6
years earlier but over the past 4 months had developed
progressively more painful back pain. In the physician’s HPI it was
noted that the pain was in the mid-back, with the patient rating it an
8 in intensity on a scale of 1 to 10. However, when the pain started,
she thought it was about a 4 on the same scale. The pain has caused
her to have neck and leg pains as well, as she has adjusted her
walking stance in order to alleviate the pain. She responded to the
physician’s questions in the review of 10 of her organ systems. Her
past medical and surgical history was noted, including the fact that
her mother and one sister had also had breast cancer. A
comprehensive history was taken. She had worked as a legal
secretary up until 2 weeks earlier but is now on sick leave. The
comprehensive physical examination performed by the physician
was a complete multi-system review of 12 organ systems. The
physician ordered a series of radiographic and laboratory tests and
reviewed her recent spine x-ray series, which revealed multiple
pathologic vertebral compression fractures. The MDM complexity
was moderate.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
2 
A 45-year-old man was sent by his PCP to an orthopedic surgeon’s
office to render an opinion for acute pain and stiffness in his right
elbow. In his problem focused history, the physician noted that the
man was a farmer and used his right hand and arm repeatedly,
lifting heavy objects. The patient had no other complaints and
reported to be in otherwise excellent health. The patient described
the pain as severe and unrelenting, and it prevented him from using
his arm. The problem focused physical examination noted the
man’s slightly swollen right elbow, with marked pain on
movement. No other problems were noted with his right upper
extremity. The physician diagnosed the problem as elbow tendinitis
and bursitis, recommended warm compresses, and gave the patient
a prescription for an anti-inflammatory medication. The MDM
complexity was straightforward.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
3 
A 72-year-old man was seen in the internal medicine clinic as an
outpatient for medical clearance prior to the replacement of his
right knee due to localized primary osteoarthritis. The patient had a
history of essential hypertension and mild coronary artery disease.
The internist noted, during the expanded problem focused history,
that the patient had no complaints relative to his hypertension or
heart disease. His blood pressure appeared to be controlled by his
medication and low-salt diet. The patient denied any chest pain or
discomfort either while working or at rest. In the physician’s
review, his cardiovascular and respiratory systems appeared to be
negative. The physician performed an expanded problem focused
physical examination of his head, neck, chest, and abdomen but
found no major problems related to his cardiovascular or
respiratory system. The internist confirmed the diagnoses
previously established and made no changes in the management of
either condition. The MDM complexity was straightforward.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________,
________________
4 
A 52-year-old patient was sent to a surgeon for an office consultation
concerning bleeding internal hemorrhoids. A problem focused
history and examination were performed. The consultant
recommended treating with medication after a straightforward
MDM.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
5 
A 60-year-old man was seen in consultation by a cardiologist in the
clinic for complaints of dyspnea, fatigue, and lightheadedness. His
history included the insertion of a pacemaker 6 years earlier. He
also had a history of mitral regurgitation. The cardiologist
performed a comprehensive cardiology physical examination,
including cardiac monitoring, pacemaker evaluation, and review of
his associated respiratory status. Noted in the comprehensive
history were a variety of complaints the patient had in addition to
the past pacemaker insertion and current mitral valve regurgitation
diagnosed by cardiac catheterization. The physician reviewed the
patient’s medical history, from the first signs of problems 6 years
earlier until the present. His review of systems elicited positive
findings in the cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal,
genitourinary, musculoskeletal, and neurologic systems. The other
systems had negative responses. The physician had multiple
management options concerning the pacemaker function but also
had to consider new valvular problems that might have been
present as well as related gastrointestinal symptoms. Extensive tests
that had been performed recently were reviewed, and additional
testing was ordered. The MDM complexity was moderate.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________ (dyspnea),
________________ (fatigue),
___________________ (dizziness),
________________ (mitral insufficiency),
________________ (Z code for status, cardiac
device, pacemaker)
6 
A 65-year-old man had recently undergone a prostatectomy for
prostate cancer. Since the surgery, his previously controlled atrial
fibrillation had become a problem again. A cardiologist was called
in for an inpatient consultation; he reviewed the patient’s present
status, including the duration and severity of his symptoms. The
cardiologist’s review of systems related strictly to the
cardiovascular system during an expanded problem focused
history. The expanded problem focused physical examination
concentrated on the man’s neck, chest, and abdomen and attempted
to elicit all cardiovascular pathology. The consultant suggested that
the atrial fibrillation could be controlled better with a different
medication. The MDM complexity was straightforward.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
7 
An internist requested an inpatient consultation from an orthopedic
surgeon to evaluate a 35-year-old female who had been in a motor
vehicle accident. After reviewing the multiple x-ray reports and the
documentation generated by the emergency department physicians,
the paramedics’ progress notes from the scene of the accident, and
the history and physical examination produced by the internist, the
orthopedist performed a complete review of systems; complete
past, family, and social history; and extended details of the history
of the present illness in a comprehensive history review. The
comprehensive physical examination was a complete
musculoskeletal and neurologic examination with a review of all
other organ systems. Based on the patient’s multiple fractures and
internal injuries, the orthopedist concluded that the patient needed
immediate surgery to repair and control the life-threatening
conditions that existed. The MDM complexity was high. A
neurosurgeon and a general surgeon were also asked to see the
patient immediately and possibly to assist in surgery. (Code only
the orthopedic consultation.)
CPT Code: ___________________
8 
A 55-year-old patient was injured at work when he fell from a house
roof and struck his head. He was admitted for a right frontal
parietal craniotomy with removal of a subdural hematoma. After 5
days of rapid recovery from this surgery, a consultation was
requested regarding a drug reaction that produced a rash on his
upper torso. The physician conducted a brief HPI during the
expanded problem focused history, in addition to an ROS focused
on the patient’s condition. The expanded problem focused
examination included three body areas and one organ system. The
MDM complexity was straightforward.
CPT Code: ___________________
9 
A 10-year-old was admitted 4 days ago for tympanotomy.
Postsurgically, the child developed febrile seizures of unknown
origin. A pediatric consultation was requested. The HPI was
extended with a complete ROS. A complete PFSH was elicited from
the mother as part of a comprehensive history. A comprehensive
examination was conducted on all body areas and organ systems.
The MDM complexity was high.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
10 
A cardiologist was asked by a family practitioner to see an 80-year-
old male inpatient a second time. One week prior, the patient, who
had multiple other medical problems, had suffered an anterior wall
myocardial infarction. Despite following the medical management
suggested by the cardiologist, the patient continued to have angina
and ventricular tachycardia. The cardiologist closely examined all of
the documentation and test results that had been generated in the
past week and performed a complete ROS and an extended HPI
during the detailed interval history. The detailed physical
examination performed was a complete cardiovascular system
examination. Based on the subjective and objective findings, the
cardiologist concluded that more aggressive medical management
was in order. Given the patient’s multiple problems coupled with
the new threat of cardiorespiratory failure, the patient was
immediately transferred to the intensive care unit. The MDM was of
high complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
11 
The attending physician had requested an inpatient consultation on
a 10-year-old admitted 7 days earlier for tympanotomy.
Postsurgically, the patient developed fever and seizures. An initial
consultation diagnosis was febrile seizure. Now, on day 7, the
child’s temperature had returned to normal but the child had had a
recurrence of seizures of increased severity. A follow-up
consultation was requested. The consultant performed a detailed
history and physical examination. The MDM was of high
complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
12 
Dr. Jones asked Dr. Williams to confirm the diagnosis of tetralogy
of Fallot in a 6-day-old male infant prior to cardiovascular surgery.
The patient was seen in the office, where Dr. Williams performed an
initial comprehensive history and physical examination on the
infant and reviewed the results of the extensive tests already
performed. The consultant confirmed the diagnosis and concluded
that the child’s problem was of high severity and recommended
immediate surgery. The MDM complexity was moderate.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
13 
The 45-year-old female’s insurance company required a second
opinion regarding the degenerative disc disease of her lumbar
spine. One orthopedic surgeon had recommended a laminectomy.
A second orthopedic surgeon was consulted in the office and
performed an expanded problem focused history and physical
examination, particularly of her musculoskeletal and neurologic
systems. Based on his findings and the conclusive findings of a
recent myelogram, the second orthopedic surgeon was quick to
conclude that the laminectomy was a reasonable course to follow.
The MDM complexity was straightforward.
CPT Code: ___________________
14 
A third-party payer sought consultation for confirmation about a
patient’s ability to return to work after the removal of a subdural
hematoma 2 months previously. The patient’s primary physician
had stated that the patient was not yet able to return to his
employment, and the third-party payer wanted a second opinion.
The patient stated that he continued to have severe and
incapacitating headaches and was unable to return to work. A
comprehensive history and physical examination were performed
in the office. The MDM was of moderate complexity, based on
physician findings.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Emergency department services
Emergency Department Services codes (99281-99288) are assigned for
new or established patients when services are provided in an
emergency department (ED) that is a part of a hospital and the ED is
available 24 hours a day. These patients are presenting for immediate
attention. The codes are assigned for patients without appointments.
Emergency Department Services codes are not assigned for patients at
the hospital on observation status, even if the observation unit is
located in or near the emergency department.
Codes 99281-99285 are based on the type of service the physician
performs in terms of the history, the examination, and the complexity
of the MDM. These codes require all three of the key components to
be assigned. In addition to this information within each code, note
that the paragraph at the end of each code that begins with “Usually,
the presenting problem(s) are of
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
” identifies the immediacy of the
care. For example, 99283 indicates that the presenting problem is of
“moderate severity,” whereas 99285 indicates that the presenting
problem is of “high severity and poses an immediate significant threat
to life
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
” Sometimes the patient’s clinical condition poses an
immediate threat to life, making it possible for the physician to use the
higher level code even if it may not be possible to perform the
required history and physical examination.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-9
1. 
What are the times associated with codes 99281-99285?
____________
2. 
If a patient presents to the emergency department in a clinically life-
threatening state that prevents the physician from performing a
complete history or physical examination, could the code 99285 still
be reported?
Yes or No?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Critical care provided to a patient in the emergency department is
reported using additional codes from the Critical Care Service code
section, which we will discuss later in this chapter.
If a patient initially treated in the emergency department requires
admittance to the hospital, the patient’s attending physician would
serve as the admitting physician.
Emergency department codes can be assigned to report the services
not only of the ED physician, but also of any physician who cares for a
patient in the ED. For example, if the patient’s primary care physician
(PCP) meets the patient in the ED or is called into the ED, and the PCP
cares for the patient in the ED, not admitting the patient to the
hospital, then the PCP reports the services using either ED codes or
outpatient established patient codes. Note that in this instance, the
PCP is NOT a consultant but is serving as the patient’s physician in
the emergency room location.
Also, ED physicians do not admit patients to a hospital. If a patient
is seen in the ED and has to be admitted to the hospital, the patient’s
PCP or other designated physician will admit the patient. An example
of a designated physician would be a hospitalist. A 
hospitalist
 is a
hospital-based physician who only sees patients in the hospital and
assumes the responsibility of the primary care physician for
hospitalized patients. This is a relatively new approach to hospital
coverage but is fast gaining popularity.
Other emergency department services. 
The Other Emergency Department Services subheading is at the end
of the Emergency Department Services subsection, and the code
located there (99288) reports the services of a physician based at the
hospital who provides two-way communication with the ambulance
or rescue team. This physician provides direction and advice to the
team as they attend the patient en route to the emergency department.
The subheading notes contain examples of the types of medical
services the physician might direct. Be certain to read these notes so
you understand the types of services the code refers to.
EXERCISE 11-13
Emergency Department Services
Use the information contained in the code descriptions in the
Emergency Department Services subsection to answer the questions
in this exercise.
1 
The severity of the presenting problem for Code 99281 would
usually be ___________________________________________.
2 
The severity of the presenting problem for Code 99284 would
usually be ___________________________________________.
3 
The severity of the presenting problem for Code 99283 would
usually be ___________________________________________.
4 
The severity of the presenting problem for Code 99282 would
usually be ___________________________________________.
Code the following:
5 
A patient in the emergency department has extreme acute chest
pains and goes into cardiac arrest. The emergency department
physician is unable to obtain a history or perform a physical
examination because the patient’s condition is critical. The MDM is
of high complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
An elderly patient in the emergency department has a temperature
of 105° F and is in acute respiratory distress. Symptoms include
shortness of breath, chest pain, cyanosis, and gasping. The
physician is unable to obtain a history or perform a comprehensive
physical examination because the patient’s condition is critical. The
MDM complexity is high.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
7 
A child presents to the emergency department with his parents after
being bitten by a dog. The child is in extreme pain and bleeding
from a wound on the forearm. The animal has not been located to
quarantine for rabies. An expanded problem focused history is
obtained and an expanded problem focused physical examination is
performed. The MDM complexity is moderate because of the
possibility of rabies.
CPT Code: ___________________
8 
The physician directs the emergency medical technicians via two-
way communications with an ambulance en route to the emergency
department with a patient in apparent cardiac arrest.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Critical care services
Critical Care Services codes (99291, 99292) identify services that are
provided during medical emergencies to patients over 71 months of
age who are either critically ill or injured. These codes require the
physician to be constantly available to the patient and providing
services exclusively to that patient. For example, a patient who is in
shock or cardiac arrest would require the physician to provide
bedside critical care services. Critical care is often, but not required to
be, provided in an acute care setting of a hospital. Acute care settings
are intensive care units, coronary care units, emergency departments,
and similar critical care units of a hospital. Codes in this subsection
are listed according to the time the physician spends providing critical
care to the patient. The time calculation is not just the face-to-face time
the physician spends with the patient. The review of records and
diagnostic results at the time of the encounter should also be counted
in determining the time spent in providing critical care to the patient.
The time the physician spends in providing other procedures must
be deducted from the total critical care time. For example, if an adult
patient is intubated during critical care, the 
time spent on the
intubation (31500) is deducted from the total critical care time because
the physician will report the intubation service separately.
The total critical care time, per day, the physician spends in care of
the patient is stated in one amount of time, even if the time was not
continuous. Code 99291 is reported only once a day for the first 30 to
74 minutes of critical care, and 99292 is reported for each additional 30
minutes beyond 74 minutes. If the critical care is less than 30 minutes,
an E/M code would be assigned to report the service.
Total Duration of Critical Care Time
CPT Codes Reported
Less than 30 minutes
appropriate E/M code
30-74 minutes
99291 × 1
75-104 minutes
99291 × 1 and 99292 × 1
105-134 minutes
99291 × 1 and 99292 × 2
135-164 minutes
99291 × 1 and 99292 × 3
165-194 minutes
99291 × 1 and 99292 × 4
195 minutes or longer
99291 and 99292 as appropriate
As an example, if a physician sees a critical care patient for 74
minutes and then leaves and returns for 30 minutes of critical care at a
later time in the same day, the coding would be for 104 minutes of
care. The coding for 104 minutes would be:
99291 for the 74 minutes
99292 for the additional 30 minutes
 
CODING SHOT
Most third-party payers will not pay for more than one physician at a
time for critical care services.
There are service codes that are bundled into the Critical Care
Services codes. These services are normally provided to stabilize the
patient. An example of this bundling is as follows: A physician starts
ventilation management (94002) while providing critical care services
to a patient in the intensive care unit of a hospital. The ventilator
management is not reported separately but, instead, is considered to
be bundled into the Critical Care Services code. The notes preceding
the critical care codes in the CPT manual list the services and
procedures bundled into the codes. If the physician provided a service
at the same time as critical care and that service is not bundled into
the code, the service could be reported separately. Some third-party
payers may require the use of modifier -25 with the critical care codes
when reporting a service that is not bundled into the Critical Care
Services. You will know what is bundled into the codes because this
information is listed either in the extensive description of the code or
in the notes preceding the code. Be certain to read these notes, as they
contain many exclusions and inclusions for these codes.
If the patient is in a critical care unit but is stable, you report the
services using codes from the Hospital Inpatient Services subsection,
Subsequent Hospital Care subheading or from the Consultations
subsection, Inpatient subheading.
 
QUICK CHECK 11-10
1. 
List two types of service and the CPT codes for the services that are
bundled into critical care services.
Such as: Chest x-rays (71010, 71015, 71020)
_____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 11-14
Critical Care Services
Fill in the information for the following:
1 
Critical care is provided to the patient for 70 minutes.
 
CPT Code(s): ____________________
2 
Can code 99292 be reported without code 99291? ____________
3 
A physician is called to the intensive care unit to provide care for a
patient who has received second-degree burns over 50% of his
body. The physician provides support for 2 hours. After leaving the
unit, the physician returns later that day to provide an additional
hour of critical care support to the patient.
 
CPT Code(s): ___________________
 
ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Nursing facility services
A 
nursing facility
 is not a hospital but does have inpatient beds and a
professional health care staff that provides health care to persons who
do not require the level of service provided in an acute care facility.
A 
skilled nursing facility
 (SNF) is one that has a professional staff
that often includes physicians and nurses. The patients of a skilled
nursing facility require less care than that given in an acute care
hospital, but more care than that provided in a nursing home. Skilled
nursing facilities are also called skilled nursing units, skilled nursing
care, or extended care facilities. Professional and practical nursing
services are available 24 hours a day. Rehabilitation services, such as
occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy, are
available on a daily basis. A skilled nursing facility was previously
called an extended care facility. Patients may stay for several weeks in
a skilled nursing facility before returning home or being transferred to
an intermediate care facility for long-term care. Skilled nursing
facilities provide care for individuals of all ages, even though the
majority of services are provided to geriatric patients.
An 
intermediate care facility
 provides regular, basic health services
to individuals who do not need the degree of care or treatment
provided in a hospital or a skilled nursing facility. Residents, because
of their mental or physical conditions, require assistance with their
activities of daily living, such as bathing, dressing, eating, and
ambulating. Intermediate care facilities generally provide long-term
care, usually over several years. Professional and practical nursing
services are available on a 24-hour basis. Activities, social services,
and dietary and other therapies are available on a daily basis. The
majority of residents of intermediate care facilities are geriatric
individuals or individuals of any age with developmental disabilities.
The 
long-term care facility
 describes health and personal services
provided to ill, aged, disabled, or mentally handicapped individuals
for an extended period of time. Other types of facilities are better
described as skilled or intermediate care facilities.
Four subheadings of nursing facility services are available: Initial
Nursing Facility Care, Subsequent Nursing Facility Care, Nursing
Facility Discharge Services, and Other Nursing Facility Services.
Initial nursing facility care. 
Initial Nursing Facility Care codes (99304-99306) do not distinguish
between new and established patients. These codes report services
provided by the physician at the time of admission or re-admission.
Assessments by physicians play a central role in the development of
the resident’s individualized care plan. The care plan is developed by
an interdisciplinary care team using the Resident Assessment
Instrument (RAI) and the Minimum Data Set (MDS).
 The MDS forms are located
on the CMS website at
www.cms.gov/NursingHomeQualityInits/Downloads/MDS20MDSAllForms.pdf
Subsequent nursing facility care. 
Subsequent Nursing Facility Care codes (99307-99310) do not
distinguish between a new and an established patient. These codes
reflect services provided by a physician on a periodic basis when a
resident does not need a comprehensive assessment. Typically, such a
resident has not had a major change in his or her condition since the
previous physician visit but requires ongoing management of a
chronic condition or treatment of an acute short-term problem. The
higher level codes are assigned to patients with new problems or
significant changes in existing problems.
Nursing facility discharge services. 
The Nursing Facility Discharge Services codes (99315, 99316) report
the services the physician renders to the patient on the day of
discharge. The codes are assigned based on the amount of time
documented for discharge management. Code 99315 is assigned if 30
minutes or less or when no time is documented. Code 99316 is
reported for documented time of greater than 30 minutes. The time
spent need not be continuous or spent entirely with the patient but
must be documented. The physician may conduct a final physical
examination, give instructions to the patient’s caregivers, and prepare
all necessary discharge documentation, referral forms, and medication
orders.
Other nursing facility services. 
Other Nursing Facility Services contains only one code, 99318, and
reports the annual nursing facility assessment provided by the
physician. By law, the nursing facility must conduct a comprehensive
assessment of each resident at least once a year and determine if there
is any significant change in the resident’s physical or mental
condition. As with many subheadings throughout the E/M section, if a
patient is admitted to a nursing facility but the service was started
elsewhere, such as a physician’s office or emergency department, all
the evaluation and management services provided to the patient in
these other locations are considered part of the nursing facility code.
For example, a patient was seen in the hospital emergency
department, where a comprehensive history and examination were
performed for a condition that required high MDM complexity (99285,
Emergency Department Services). The physician made the decision to
admit the patient to a nursing facility on the same day. Rather than
reporting 99285 (Emergency Department Services), you would report
the same level service from the subheading Initial Nursing Facility
Care, 99306.
Nursing Facility Services codes are also assigned for services in a
type of place you would not think would apply—psychiatric
residential treatment centers. The center must be a stand-alone facility
or a separate part of a facility that provides group living facilities and
must have 24-hour staffing. Nursing Facility Services codes identify
evaluation and management services. If a physician also provides
medical psychotherapy, you would report those services separately.
When a patient has been in the hospital and is discharged from the
hospital to a nursing facility, all on the same day, you can report the
hospital discharge (99238-99239) and the nursing facility admission
(99304-99306) separately. This is also true for same-day services for
patients who are discharged from observation status (99217) and
admitted to a nursing facility (99304-99306).
EXERCISE 11-15
Nursing Facility Services
Answer the following:
1 
According to the code description for 99305, the usual level of
severity of the problem(s) that required admission to the nursing
facility is:
_______________________________________________________________________________________
2 
A 72-year-old male patient is transferred to a nursing facility from a
hospital after suffering a cerebrovascular accident (stroke) with
cerebral infarction. The patient needs a comprehensive assessment
before his active rehabilitation plan can be started. A
comprehensive history is gathered by the internist, including the
patient’s chief complaint of left-sided weakness on his dominant
side, an extended HPI, and a complete ROS. Details of the patient’s
past, family, and social history add information to the care-planning
process. The internist performs a comprehensive multisystem
physical examination. After much deliberation with the
multidisciplinary rehabilitation team, the physician determines that
the patient is ready for active rehabilitation. The physician also
writes orders to continue treatment of the patient’s other medical
conditions, including hypertension and diabetes. The MDM
complexity is high.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________
Using the following information within the code descriptions in
the Subsequent Nursing Facility Care subheading, match the medical
decision making complexity in the description of the code with the
code:
3 
99307 _____
a 
moderate
4 
99308 _____
b 
low
5 
99309 _____
c 
straightforward
Code the following:
6 
Subsequent follow-up care is provided for a comatose patient
transferred to a long-term care center from the hospital. The
resident had a brain injury and shows no signs of consciousness on
examination but appears to have developed a minor upper
respiratory tract infection with a fever and cough. The physician
performs an expanded problem focused interval history (by way of
nursing staff notes) and physical examination, including neurologic
status, respiratory status, and status of related organ systems.
Because the physician is concerned that the existing respiratory
infection could progress to pneumonia, appropriate treatment is
ordered. The MDM complexity is moderate.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Domiciliary, rest home (e.g., boarding home),
or custodial care services
These codes (99324-99337) are divided into subheadings based on the
patients’ status as new or established service provided. The codes are
arranged in levels based on the documentation in the patient’s
medical record. Time estimates are established for codes in this
category.
These codes are reported for the evaluation and management of
residents who reside in a domiciliary, rest home, or custodial care
center. Generally, health services are not available on site, nor are any
medical services included in the codes. These facilities provide
residential care, including lodging, meals, supervision, personal care,
and leisure activities, to persons who, because of their physical,
mental, or emotional condition, are not able to live independently.
Such facilities might include alternative living residences, retirement
centers, community-based living units, group homes, or residential
treatment centers. These facilities provide custodial care for residents
of all ages.
Domiciliary, rest home (e.g., assisted living
facility), or home care plan oversight services
Codes 99339, 99340 apply to services provided to a patient who is
being cared for at home and not enrolled with a home health care
agency. These patients are being cared for by family members, health
care professionals, and other types of caregivers. These codes are not
reported if the patient is receiving his or her care from a home health
agency, hospice program, or nursing facility. When reporting these
codes the patient is not present, rather the physician is developing a
care plan or overseeing the care of the patient. The physician’s time
may be reported if the time was over 15 minutes within a calendar
month. Code 99339 reports 15-29 minutes, and 99340 reports 30
minutes or more. Again, these codes are only reported once for each
calendar month.
Home services
Under certain circumstances, health care services can also be provided
to patients in their homes. Home visits and interactions must be
strictly for the patient’s benefit, thus careful documentation of a
patient’s need is important. Times have been established for this
category of services. Note that there is a statement about typical time
located under the code description in the paragraph that begins,
“Usually, the presenting problem(s) is
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
” Never report a code based
on time unless at least 50% of the time was spent on counseling or
coordinating care.
 
CODING SHOT
Time spent traveling to or from the patient’s home should not be
factored into the overall time of care.
The codes (99341-99350) for these services are also divided into
categories for new and for established patients, and all documentation
must meet the E/M guidelines.
 
From the Trenches
“I have found that there is definitely a sense of family among coders. Like all
families, we don’t always agree on everything, but we care about each other’s
thoughts and challenges
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
and know that there is always someone out there
that can be there for you, whether it is a coding dilemma or a bigger, career-
type decision.”
Joan
EXERCISE 11-16
Home Services
Code the following scenario:
1 
A 64-year-old established female patient has diabetes mellitus and
has been having problems adjusting her insulin doses. She has had
an onset of dizziness and sensitivity to light. The physician makes a
home visit during which he gathers a brief HPI and a problem-
pertinent ROS during the problem focused history. The problem
focused physical examination focuses on the body systems
currently affected by the diabetes. The physician finds the patient’s
condition to be moderately severe and the MDM complexity is
straightforward.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Prolonged services
In the Prolonged Services subsection there are three subheadings:
■
 
Prolonged Physician Service 
With
 Direct Patient Contact
■
 
Prolonged Physician Service 
Without
 Direct Patient Contact
■
 
Standby Services
Prolonged physician services with or without direct
patient contact. 
Prolonged Physician Services codes (99354-99360; 99415-99416) are all
add-on codes. Note the plus symbol (1) beside all codes in the 99354-
99360; 99415-99416 range. Because add-on codes can be reported only
with another code, all Prolonged Physician Services codes are
intended to be used only in addition to other codes to show an
extension of some other service. The time is to be documented in the
medical record to support the submission of the Prolonged Care
code(s). The following example illustrates the use of these codes.
Example
An established patient with a history of COPD presents, in an office
visit, with acute bronchospasm and moderate respiratory distress.
The physician conducts a problem focused history followed by a
problem focused examination, which shows a respiratory rate of 30,
and labored breathing and wheezing are heard in all lung fields.
Office treatment is initiated; it includes intermittent bronchial dilation
and subcutaneous epinephrine. The service requires the physician to
have intermittent direct contact with the patient over a 2-hour period.
The MDM complexity is low.
The office visit service would be reported using the office visit code
99212 (which has 10 minutes as the usual time); but the additional
time the physician spent providing service to the patient over and
above that which is indicated in code 99212 would have to be reported
using a prolonged service code.
 
CAUTION 
If you hadn’t carefully read the notes preceding the Prolonged Services codes,
you would not know that there are many rules that govern the calculation of
time when determining the codes.
As the notes indicate, the first 30 minutes of prolonged services are
not even counted but are considered part of the initial service. So you
cannot use a prolonged services code until after the first 30 minutes of
the prolonged services have been provided. The physician, 
therefore,
has to spend 30 minutes with the patient in prolonged services before
it is possible to report any prolonged service time.
The reporting on this service is as follows:
120 minutes spent with patient
−10
 minutes for the usual time in 99212
110 minutes remaining
According to the grid before 99354, for 105 minutes or more you are
to report 99354 × 1 and 99355 × 2.
The time the physician spends providing the prolonged services
does not have to be continuous, as is the situation in this example; the
physician monitored the patient on an intermittent basis, coming into
the room to check on the patient and then leaving the room.
But let’s change this case a bit and see how the coding changes. If
the physician spent 70 minutes with the patient, you could code only
the first hour at 99354. The additional 10 minutes beyond the first 60
are not coded separately. Remember that you would need at least 15
minutes beyond the first hour to code for the time beyond the first
hour. For help in applying these codes, refer to the table preceding the
codes; there you can locate the total time your physician spent with
the patient and see an example of the correct coding.
The direct Prolonged Physician Services codes describe services that
require the physician to have 
direct contact
 with the patient; but the
Prolonged Physician Services Without Direct Patient Contact codes
describe services during which the physician is not in direct contact
with the patient. For example, a physician evaluates an established
patient, a 70-year-old female with dementia, in an office visit. The
physician then spends an extensive amount of time discussing the
patient’s condition, her treatment plan, and other recommendations
with the daughter of the patient. The services would be reported by
using an office visit code for the patient evaluation and the
appropriate prolonged service without direct contact code for the time
spent with the daughter.
Prolonged Physician Services codes are most often reported with
the higher level E/M codes, which themselves carry longer time
frames. According to the CPT notes for Prolonged Physician Services,
these codes are add-on codes and are reported in addition to another
E/M code.
Prolonged Physician Services With Direct Patient Contact codes are
divided on the basis of whether the services were provided to an
outpatient or an inpatient.
Standby services. 
The code (99360) for Standby Services is reported when a physician, at
the request of another physician, is standing by in case his or her
services are needed. The standby physician cannot be rendering
services to another patient during this time. The standby code is
reported in increments of 30 minutes. The 30-minute increments
referred to here really mean from the first minute to the 30th minute
and do not have any of the complicated rules for reporting time that
exist for reporting prolonged services.
An important note concerning the standby code is that this code is
reported only when there is a documented request in the patient’s
medical record and 
no service
 is performed and there is 
no direct
contact
 with the patient. This code is not reported when a standby
status ends, and the standby physician provides a service to a patient.
The service the physician provides is reported as any other service
would be, even though it began as a standby service.
 
CODING SHOT
To report standby services, there must be a written request for
standby services in the medical record.
Read the notes before Code 99360 before completing Exercise 11-17.
EXERCISE 11-17
Prolonged and Standby Services
Using the notes in the subsections, answer the following:
1 
Does the time the physician spends with the patient in prolonged,
direct contact have to be continuous? ____________________
2 
Can a code from the Prolonged Services subsection be reported
alone? ____________________________________________
3 
If the prolonged contact with the patient lasts less than 30 minutes,
is the time reported separately? _______________________
4 
The codes in the Prolonged Services With Direct Patient Contact
subheading are based not only on the time the physician spends
with the patient, but also on another factor. What is that other
factor? ____________________________________________
5 
Are the codes in the subheading Prolonged Services Without Direct
Patient Contact categorized according to the place of service?
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
6 
According to the notes in the Standby Services subsection, can a
physician report the time spent in proctoring (monitoring) another
physician?
_______________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Case management services
The Case Management Services subsection (99363-99368) consists of
codes used by physicians to report anticoagulant therapy and
coordination of care services with other health care professionals.
Anticoagulant management. 
The codes report anticoagulant services using Warfarin/Coumadin.
Anticoagulants inhibit coagulation of the blood and are prescribed to
patients with various thromboembolic disorders. Patients on this
medication are monitored by means of blood tests and adjustments
are then made in the blood thinner dosage if the physician determines
the clotting levels are not ideal. Codes 99363 and 99364 report the
monitoring services provided on an outpatient basis for the initial 90
days of therapy (with a minimum of eight assessments) and each
subsequent 90 days of therapy (with at least three assessments). Any
period less than 60 continuous outpatient days is not reported.
Medical team conferences. 
The medical team must include at least three qualified health care
professionals from different specialties. The team members must have
all performed a face-to-face evaluation or treatment of the patient
within the previous 60 days. Codes 99366-99368 are divided based on
if the patient and/or family is/are present in the conference with the
participation of the physician and non-physician health care
professionals.
EXERCISE 11-18
Case Management Services
Complete the following:
1 
What is the time component specified in the Medical Team
Conference codes from the Case Management Services subsection?
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
What are the three Medical Team Conference codes?
_____________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Care plan oversight services
At times, health care professionals are asked to manage a complex
case that involves an individual such as a hospice patient or a patient
who is homebound and receives the majority of his or her health care
from visiting nurses. When regular communication is necessary
between the nurses and the physician to discuss revising the care
plan, coordinating the treatment plan with other professionals, or
adjusting the therapies, codes from the Care Plan Oversight Services
subsection (99374-99380) report these additional services. The codes
are divided according to whether the supervision is of a patient being
cared for by home health workers or a patient in a hospice or nursing
facility. The codes are also divided based on the length of time of the
service—either 15 to 29 minutes or 30 minutes or more. Reporting is
by time over a month-long period.
Preventive medicine services
Preventive Medicine Services codes (99381-99429) report the routine
evaluation and management of a patient who is healthy and has no
complaint. The codes in this subsection report a routine physical
examination provided at the patient’s request, such as a well-baby
check-up. Preventive Medicine codes are intended to identify
comprehensive services, not a single system review. The codes are
reported for infants, children, adolescents, and adults; they differ
according to the age of the patient and whether the patient is a new or
an established patient.
 
CODING SHOT
If the physician should encounter a problem or abnormality during
the course of a preventive service, and the problem or abnormality
requires significant additional service, you can also code an office
visit code with a modifier -25 added. The modifier -25 is added to
indicate that a significant, separately identifiable E/M service was
performed by the physician on the same day as the preventive
medicine service. If you did not add the modifier -25, the third-party
payer would think that you had made an error and were reporting
both a preventive medicine service code and an office visit code for
the same service. Only with the use of the modifier -25 can you
convey that the services were indeed separate.
Note that in the code descriptions for both the New Patient and the
Established Patient categories, the terms “comprehensive history” and
“comprehensive examination” are used. These terms are not the same
as the ones used with other E/M codes (99201-99350). Here,
“comprehensive” means a complete history and a complete
examination, as is conducted during an annual physical. The
comprehensive examination performed as part of the preventive
medicine E/M service is a multisystem examination, but the extent of
the examination is determined by the age of the patient and the risk
factors identified for that individual.
EXERCISE 11-19
Preventive Medicine Services
Complete the following:
1 
According to the notes in the Preventive Medicine Services
subsection, the extent and focus of the services provided, whether
to a new or established patient, will depend largely upon what
factor? _______________________________________________
2 
If, during the preventive medicine evaluation, a problem is
encountered that requires the physician to perform a problem
focused E/M service, what modifier would be appended to the
code? ___________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Counseling risk factor reduction and behavior change
intervention. 
These codes (99401-99429) are for both new and established healthy
patients. The services are based on whether individual or group
counseling is provided to the patient and on the amount of time the
service requires. Codes in this category report a physician’s services to
a patient for risk factor interventional counseling, such as a diet and
exercise program, smoking cessation, or contraceptive management.
Non-face-to-face services
These codes are divided into Telephone Services (99441-99443) and
On-Line Medical Evaluation (99444–99449) assigned to report services
provided by a physician or other qualified professional. To report
these same services provided by a non-physician, assign Medicine
codes 98966-98969. The notes and the code descriptions for these
codes indicate that the telephone or online service cannot originate
from a related assessment that was provided within the previous
seven days or result in an appointment within the next 24 hours or the
soonest available appointment. The telephone services are reported
based on the documented time, and the online service is reported only
once for the same episode of care during a seven-day period.
Interprofessional Telephone/Internet Consultations (99446-99449) are
codes a consultant reports for an assessment and management
services requested by the patient’s attending or primary. During this
service, there is no face-to-face contact between the patient and
consultant. Usually, these services are provided in an urgent or
emergency situation. The patient may be new or established with the
consultant, with a new or worsening problem, and has not been seen
in a face-to-face encounter within the last 14 days. The consultant
reviews the medical documentation and any available assessments,
such as imaging studies, and the review is bundled into the codes and
not reported separately.
Although most payers and CMS do not currently reimburse for
telephone services, some payers do, such as Workers’ Compensation.
Even if a payer does not reimburse, you should still submit all the
codes necessary to completely explain the service. This type of
historical data is used to analyze services provided and may, in the
future, result in changes to reimbursement.
Special evaluation and management services
The codes in this subsection (99450-99456) are used to report
evaluations for life or disability insurance baseline information. The
services can be performed in any setting for either a new or an
established patient. The codes vary, based on whether the service is
for an examination for life or disability insurance and whether the
examination is done by the physician treating the patient’s disability
or by someone other than the treating physician.
EXERCISE 11-20
Special Evaluation and Management
Services
Answer the following:
1 
An insurance examination was conducted by the physician for a
new patient for a term life insurance policy. From what subheading
would you select a code to report this service?
_____________________________________________________________
2 
A 50-year-old man was referred for a disability examination. The
patient had been injured at work when he slipped off a ladder and
fell from a height of 10 feet, landing on his back. He has not
returned to work since that time 6 months ago. The patient had
been under the care of a physician from another state and was
referred by the insurance company for the assessment of the
patient’s ability to return to work. His primary physician had stated
that this patient will be unable to return to his previous work as a
bricklayer. From what subheading would you select a code to
report this service? _____________________________________
3 
What is the difference between the two codes in the Work Related or
Medical Disability Evaluation Services codes?
________________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________
4 
A 58-year-old man was seen by his private physician for an
examination as part of his claim for long-term medical disability.
The patient has chronic obstructive lung disease with severe
emphysema and has been unable to work during the past year. The
physician completed all the necessary documentation required by
the insurance company, including his opinion that the patient
would be unable to work in the future, as his pulmonary function is
markedly impaired, in spite of continual respiratory and
pharmacologic therapy.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________ (medical
exam for insurance certification),
________________ (COPD with emphysema)
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Newborn care services
Newborn Care Services codes (99460-99465) report services to normal
newborns. Note that there are three history and examination codes;
one is specifically for a newborn assessment and discharge from a
hospital or birthing room on the same date (99463), one is for hospital
or birthing room deliveries (99460), and one is for other than a
hospital or birthing center (99461). The initial services are reported on
a per day basis. Subsequent services are reported with 99462. If the
physician provides a discharge service to a newborn discharged
subsequent to the admission date, you would choose a code from the
Hospital Inpatient Services subsection, Hospital Discharge Services
subheading (99238, 99239).
Delivery/Birthing Room Attendance (99464, 99465) codes report the
attendance of a physician, at the request of the delivering physician, to
provide the initial stabilization of a newborn or for the
resuscitation/ventilation of the newborn. The request for physician
attendance must be documented in the patient’s medical record.
Inpatient neonatal intensive care and pediatric
and neonatal critical care services (99466-
99486)
Pediatric critical care patient transport. 
These codes (99466, 99467) report face-to-face services provided to a
pediatric patient (24 months of age or younger). During the provision
of these services, the patient is being transported from one facility to
another. The codes are time-based. Codes 99485 and 99486 report
supervision by a control physician with the first 30 minutes reported
with 99485 and each additional 30 minutes reported with 99486. If the
physician is in physical attendance for less than 30 minutes, the
service is not reported with these transportation codes.
 
CAUTION 
Bundled into the codes are routine monitoring evaluations, such as heart
rate and blood pressure. Other services provided before transport and
nonroutine services provided during transport may be reported separately.
Inpatient neonatal and pediatric critical care. 
Codes 99468-99476 report initial and subsequent critical care services
to neonatal and pediatric patients. The codes are based on the age of
the patient:
■
 
Neonate, 28 days or younger
■
 
Pediatric, 29 days through 24 months of age or 2 years through 5
years
The name of the intensive care unit does not matter in the
assignment of these codes. The services can be provided in a pediatric
intensive care unit, neonatal critical care unit, or any of the many
other names that these types of intensive care units have. 
Bundled
into the codes are many services you would anticipate would be used
in the support of a critically ill neonate or pediatric patient (for
example, arterial catheters, nasogastric tube placement, endotracheal
intubation, and invasive electronic monitoring of vital signs). The
notes preceding the codes list bundled services, descriptions, and
codes for services (for example, blood transfusion, 36440). To ensure
that you do not unbundle, you will need to refer back to these lists of
bundled services. If the physician performed a service not listed in the
bundle, you would report the service separately. Other notes
indicating bundled services appear in the code descriptions. For
example, cardiac and/or respiratory support is bundled into some of
the codes.
Initial and continuing intensive care services. 
When a neonate or infant is 
not
 considered critically ill but still needs
intensive observation and other intensive care services, the Initial and
Continuing Intensive Care Services codes (99477-99480) are reported.
These codes are not based on the age of the patient, but are based on
weight.
■
 
Very low birth weight (VLBW) is less than 1500 grams (less than 3.3
pounds)
■
 
Low birth weight (LBW) is 1500-2500 grams (3.3-5.5 pounds)
■
 
Normal birth weight is 2501-5000 grams (5.51-11.01 pounds)
The assignment of these codes changes when the neonate/infant
weight changes. The codes from the subsection are reported only once
in every 24-hour period (same day). There are no hourly service codes
as there are in other critical care codes.
EXERCISE 11-21
Newborn Care and Neonatal/Pediatric
Critical Care Services
Answer the following:
1 
What does the abbreviation VLBW mean?
_________________________________________________________________
2 
What code would you assign to report the face-to-face service
provided by a physician during an interfacility transport of a
critically ill patient who is 16 months of age? The service was for 60
minutes.
CPT Code: ___________________
3 
A normal newborn was admitted to the hospital on Saturday
morning and was discharged Saturday evening. The physician
provided evaluation and management services including the
admission and the discharge. What code would you assign to report
the physician service?
CPT Code: ___________________
4 
The physician provided a subsequent inpatient service to a 3-year-
old critically ill patient.
CPT Code: ___________________
5 
The physician provided an intensive care service to an infant of 1450
grams on the patient’s second day of the hospital stay.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Care management services (99487-99490)
Chronic care management services (99490) 
Reporting of 99490 requires the patient to have two or more chronic
conditions that are expected to last at least 12 months or result in
death. There is a risk of death or functional decline. A comprehensive
care plan is established, implemented, revised, or monitored. At least
20 minutes of physician directed staff time is provided during the
month.
Complex chronic care management services (99487,
99489) 
Codes 99487 and 99489 report complex chronic care management
services provided during a month. In addition to compliance with
chronic care criteria, there is development of or substantial revision of
a comprehensive care plan. The MDM is of moderate to high
complexity and includes at least 60 minutes of physician directed
clinical staff time. The CPT notes identify extensive criteria for
assignment of these codes. The codes are time-based of at least 60
minutes per calendar month and each additional 30 minutes.
Transitional care management services
(99495-99496)
Codes 99495 and 99496 are transitional care management codes that
are based on the number of days after discharge from a medical
facility and if the medical decision making complexity is moderate or
high. The service involves the management of the various available
care options for the patient. These codes can be assigned for a new or
established patient and require an initial face-to-face visit, patient
contact, and reconciliation of the patient’s medications during a
specified time frame.
Advance care planning (99497-99498)
Advance Care Planning codes report face-to-face services with a
patient or the patient’s surrogate and a physician or other qualified
health care professional to counsel and discuss advance directives
regarding medical treatment; for example, Medical Orders for Life-
Sustaining Treatment (MOLST). When reporting these codes, there is
no active management of the problem(s) during the reported time.
Services are reported based on the first 30 minutes and each
additional 30-minute increment. These codes may be reported with
select E/M codes, such as 99201-99215.
Other evaluation and management services
Other Evaluation and Management Services (99499) is the last
subsection in the E/M section. Code 99499 is an unlisted code that is
used to indicate that there is no other code that accurately represents
the services provided to the patient. A special report would
accompany the unlisted E/M service code. 99499 should be reported if
the key components of an E/M service do not meet the lowest level of
a category (e.g., 99221).
Coding practice
 
CONGRATULATIONS!
Good job! You have been through all of the E/M codes and are now
familiar with the basics of CPT code arrangement. Can you imagine
how well you would know your favorite novel if you read it several
times a month? Well, coders use their CPT manuals every day and
become very familiar with the information in the guidelines, notes,
and descriptions of the codes. Please be sure to locate the code in the
CPT manual and read all notes, guidelines, and descriptions about
each code you work with. In this way, you will build a solid
knowledge foundation.
Now let’s begin to do some coding that will require you to combine
all the information you have learned as you begin to code patient
cases.
EXERCISE 11-22
Coding Practice
Code the following:
1 
A new patient is seen in the office for an earache (otalgia). The
history and examination are problem focused and the MDM
complexity is straightforward. The diagnosis was acute mastoiditis.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
An established patient is seen in the office of an ENT (ear-nose-
throat) specialist with the chief complaint of otalgia. The physician
completes a problem focused history and physical examination of
the head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat. To the physician, this is a
straightforward case of acute otitis media, and prescription
medications are ordered. The MDM complexity is straightforward.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
An established patient is seen in the office for a blood pressure
check, which is done by the physician’s nurse.
CPT Code: ___________________
4 
Lilly Wilson, a new patient, is seen by the physician in the skilled
nursing facility for an initial nursing facility assessment. Mrs.
Wilson recently suffered a cerebral thrombosis with residual
dysphagia and paresis of the left extremities. She was transferred
from the acute care hospital to the skilled nursing facility for
concentrated rehabilitation. Mrs. Wilson also has arteriosclerotic
heart disease with a permanent pacemaker in place, rheumatoid
arthritis, urinary incontinence, and macular degeneration in her
right eye. The physician, who did not know Mrs. Wilson prior to
her transfer, performs a comprehensive history and physical
examination. Given the patient’s multiple diagnoses and the
moderate amount of data the physician has to review, the MDM is
of a high level of complexity.
CPT Code: ___________________
5 
John Taylor is a 16-year-old outpatient who is a new patient to the
office. John complains of severe pustule facial acne. The history and
physical examination are expanded problem focused. The physician
must consider related organ systems in addition to the
integumentary system in order to treat the condition properly. With
the minimal number of diagnoses to consider and the minimal
amount of data to review, the physician’s decision making is
straightforward with regard to the plan of care.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
Jan Sharp, an established patient, has an office appointment because
she needs a new dressing on the laceration on her arm. The
physician’s nurse changes the dressing.
CPT Code: ___________________
7 
Anna Rall is seen in the emergency department, complaining of
pressure in her chest and the feeling that her heart is racing. After
her vital signs are taken, an immediate electrocardiogram is
performed, and her heart rate is found to be in excess of 160 beats
per minute, with increased activity at the atrioventricular junction.
After performing a comprehensive history and physical
examination, the physician continues to evaluate the patient, who
has been placed on continuous electrocardiographic monitoring.
The emergency department physician documents the diagnosis of
paroxysmal nodal tachycardia and calls a cardiologist for a
consultation and possible admission of the patient to the hospital.
Given the uncertainty of the diagnosis and the various other
possible options, the physician’s decision making is at a highly
complex level. (Code only the emergency department physician’s
services.)
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
8 
A physician is called to the intensive care unit at the local hospital to
care for Joe West, a patient in coronary crisis. The physician spends
an hour at the patient’s bedside, stabilizing him.
CPT Code: ___________________
9 
The physician is preparing to leave the hospital after seeing Joe West
but is called back to the intensive care unit to see and stabilize
another patient, Ted Keel. The service to the patient takes 11⁄2
hours.
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
10 
An established patient, Harriet Turner, comes into the office for a
follow-up visit. She had been prescribed medication for her recent
onset of depression, but since her last visit, when the dosage was
increased, she has felt that the medication is making her sleepy and
lethargic. Considering the other factors such as other medical
problems and drug interactions, the physician spends 25 minutes
with the patient performing a detailed history and physical
examination. After reviewing the details as well as recent laboratory
work, the physician concludes that a different medication should be
prescribed. The physician’s decision making is moderately complex,
given the possible medical complications that could arise.
CPT Code: ___________________
11 
Dr. Welton calls Dr. Stouffer to perform a consultation on Carol
Jones for advice on the management of her diabetes. Mrs. Jones is
hospitalized for a hysterectomy, which had been an uncomplicated
procedure, but is experiencing a slow recovery 4 days postop. Her
abdominal wound does not appear to be healing well and her blood
sugar has been fluctuating each day. Dr. Stouffer, who has never
met Mrs. Jones before, performs a comprehensive, multisystem
physical examination and completes a comprehensive history with
a complete review of systems and extensive past medical history
review. Dr. Stouffer recommends a new insulin regimen in addition
to other medications to manage what might be a postoperative
wound infection. Dr. Stouffer’s medical decision making is of
moderate complexity because he has to consider multiple
diagnoses, a moderate amount of data, and the moderate risk of
complications that Mrs. Jones could develop.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
CONGRATULATIONS!
Now you’re coding! Be sure to check your answers as you complete
each activity. If you identify a code incorrectly, go back and read the
CPT manual information again.
Documentation guidelines
Medicare recipients account for the majority of patients receiving
services in the American health care system. Thus, any change by the
third-party payer, Medicare, has dramatic effects on the health care
system. One such change that currently is in development is the
documentation necessary when submitting a claim for Evaluation and
Management services provided to a Medicare patient. The Medicare
program is the responsibility of the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS), formerly the Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA). Several years ago, CMS determined that
there should be a nationally uniform requirement for documentation
contained in the patient record when submitting charges for E/M
services. The CMS developed a set of standards for documentation of
E/M services. The standards are informational items that must be in
the patient record to substantiate a given level of service. The
standards are called the 
Documentation Guidelines
. These guidelines
apply only to E/M services and only to patients covered by Medicare
and Medicaid. E/M services represent 50% of all services provided to
these patients. The importance of the guidelines cannot be
underestimated. Whatever guidelines the CMS institutes for patients
have a dramatic effect on the systems in health care and will soon
spread to other third-party payers, who will then begin to require the
same or similar documentation.
History of the development of guidelines
The CMS published the first set of documentation guidelines in 1995,
but did not require compliance for payment of claims. The 1995
Documentation Guidelines are posted on the Evolve website for this
text (see 
Appendix A
 for free access information). The 1995 guidelines
are easier to understand because they are not lengthy or complex. The
documentation guidelines (DG) present information about what must
be contained in the medical record for that information to “qualify” as
documentation. For example, one DG states, “The CC, ROS and PFSH
may be listed as separate elements of history, or they may be included
in the description of the history of the present illness.” This means
that the 
location in the documentation of the chief complaint; review
of systems; and past, family, or social history is not important, but
what is important is that each of these items is documented in the
record. Another example of the content of the 1995 guidelines is a DG
for a general multisystem examination as: “The medical record for a
general multisystem examination should include findings about 8 or
more of the 12 organ systems.” The documentation guidelines provide
further clarification as to the documentation required to assign a level
to the history, examination, and medical decision making as stated in
the medical record.
A new set of guidelines was published in July of 1997 for
implementation on January 1, 1998. The 1997 set of guidelines was
intended to be the standard used when reviewing claims for payment
and is also posted on the Evolve website for this text (see 
Appendix A
for free access information). If the physician did not have the
documentation required in the guidelines, payment would be
adjusted based on what was actually in the medical record. The
guidelines were so complex and required such extensive revision of
medical record-keeping practices that the AMA (American Medical
Association), on behalf of its physician members, requested an
extension of the implementation date to allow time for education
about the guidelines and for the CMS to meet with representatives of
the AMA to reconsider the guidelines. Although the CMS rescinded
the requirement for strict compliance with the guidelines, they
continue random review of claims, based on whichever set of
guidelines (1995 or 1997) the provider has elected to use.
The 1997 Documentation Guidelines specify the information that
must be documented in the medical record for an E/M service to
qualify for a given level of service. 
Fig. 11-9
 illustrates the examination
requirements for a general multisystem examination under the 1997
Documentation Guidelines. Note that for an examination to qualify as
an expanded problem focused examination, the medical record must
document that the physician performed at least six of the elements
identified by a bullet (•) in 
Fig. 11-10
. If the medical record documents
that only five of the elements identified by a bullet were performed,
the examination would have to be reported at the lower problem
focused examination level.
FIGURE 11–9
1997 Documentation Guidelines for general
multisystem examination requirements.
FIGURE 11–10
1997 Documentation Guidelines of the general
multisystem elements.
A revised set of guidelines, published in 2000, took into
consideration some of the suggestions put forth by the AMA. At the
time of the publication of this text, the CMS and the 
AMA were still in
discussions regarding which set of documentation guidelines would
become the standard for documenting E/M services.
 The CMS has its own
website: 
www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning-
Network-MLN/MLNEdWebGuide/EMDOC.html
. You will find many
articles regarding documentation guidelines for E/M services if you
do a search of the CMS website.
Although the guidelines will continue to be revised, documentation
guidelines will be a part of the standard for the medical record now
and in the future for Medicare and Medicaid patients. You can
anticipate that, as a coder, you will be required to learn about and
follow these documentation guidelines.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 11, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 Office, hospital, emergency department, and nursing home locations
describe what factor in code assignments?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 What patient status is assigned to an encounter that has been seen
by the same specialty within the past 3 years?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
3 This status is assigned to a patient who has been formally admitted
to a health care facility. __________________________
4 The levels of service are based on key components and what factors?
___________________________________________
5 Documented key components include history, examination, and
_______________ _______________ _______________.
6 Subjective information given by the patient is part of what key
component? ______________________________________
7 Documented observations by the physician about the patient’s
complaint or problem is considered what type of information?
_______________________________________________________________________________________
8 Two of the three elements must be met or exceeded to qualify for a
level of ______________________________________.
9 When a physician arranges for other services to be provided to the
patient, this is considered what type of contributory factor?
____________________________________________________________________________________________
10 What CPT code reports services provided in an office for which the
physician may not be present? ___________________
11 The last subsection in the E/M section describing an unlisted code
is what type of evaluation and management services?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
12 CMS developed a set of standards for documentation of E/M
services which are called ______________ ______________.
13 A general multi-system exam that includes one to five elements
identified by a bullet in one or more organ systems or body areas
according to 1995 documentation guidelines is a(n)
____________________ ____________________ examination.
Chapter 11, part I, theory
Without using the CPT manual, complete the following:
1 Is examination of the back an organ system or body area
examination?
a organ system
b body area
2 The four types of patient status are new, ___________________,
inpatient, and outpatient.
3 The first outpatient visit is called the _________________ visit, and
the second visit is called the _________________ visit.
4 The first three factors a coder must consider when coding are patient
_______________________, type of service, and ___________________
of service.
5 How many types of histories are there?
________________________________________________________________
6 Which history is more complex?
a problem focused history
b expanded problem focused history
Match the four types of examinations:
7 least difficult _______________________
8 next least difficult ____________________
9 next most difficult ____________________
10 most difficult _______________________
a expanded problem focused
b comprehensive
c detailed
d problem focused
11 The examination that is limited to the affected body area is the
__________________________________ (two words).
12 What does VLBW stand for?
______________________________________________________________
(four words)
13 What medical decision making involves a situation in which the
diagnosis and management options are minimal, data amount and
complexity that must be reviewed are minimal/none, and there is a
minimal risk to the patient of complications or death?
____________________________________________________________________________
14 What term is used to describe a patient who has been formally
admitted to a hospital?
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
Chapter 11, part II, practical
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, identify the codes for the following
cases:
15 The physician provides initial intensive care service for the
evaluation and management of a critically ill newborn (5 days old)
inpatient for one day.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16 A 55-year-old man is seen by the dermatologist for the first time
and complains of two cystic lesions on his back. Considering that the
patient is otherwise healthy and has a primary care physician caring
for him, the dermatologist focuses the history of the present illness on
the skin lesions (problem focused history) and focuses the problem
focused physical examination on the patient’s trunk. The physician
concludes with straightforward decision making that the lesions are
sebaceous cysts. The physician advises the patient that the lesions
should be monitored for any changes but that no surgical intervention
is warranted at this time.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
ICD-10-CM Code:
_______________________________________________________________________________
17 A 68-year-old woman visits her internist again complaining of
angina that seems to have worsened over the past 3 days. The patient
had had an acute anterior wall myocardial infarction (MI) 2 months
earlier. One month after the acute MI, she began to have angina
pectoris. The patient also states that she thinks the medications are
causing her to have gastrointestinal problems while not relieving her
symptoms. She had refused a cardiac catheterization after her MI to
evaluate the extent of her coronary artery disease. The physician
performs a detailed history and a detailed physical examination of her
cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal systems. The
physician indicates that the decision-making process is moderately
complex, given the number of conditions it is necessary to consider.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
18 A 22-year-old woman visits the gynecologist for the first time since
relocating from another state last year. The patient wants a
gynecologic examination and wants to discuss contraceptive options
with the physician (think Preventive Medicine Services!). The
physician collects pertinent past and social history related to the
patient’s reproductive system and performs a pertinent systems
review extended to a limited number of additional systems. The
physician completes the history with an extended history of her
present physical state. A physical examination includes her
cardiovascular and respiratory systems with an extended review of
her genitourinary system. Given the patient’s history of not tolerating
certain types of oral contraceptives in the past, the physician’s
decision making involves a limited number of management options,
all with low risk of morbidity to the patient.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________ (exam),
________________ (counseling, for
contraceptive maintenance)
19 An established patient is admitted on observation status for
influenza symptoms and extreme nausea and vomiting. The patient is
dehydrated and has been experiencing dizziness and mental
confusion for the past 2 days. Prior to this episode the patient was
well but became acutely ill overnight with these symptoms. Given the
abrupt onset of these symptoms, the physician has to consider
multiple possible causes and orders a variety of laboratory tests to be
performed. The patient is at risk for a moderate number of
complications. The MDM complexity is moderate. A comprehensive
history is collected, and a comprehensive head-to-toe physical
examination is performed.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________,
________________
20 A physician visits another patient on observation status who has
severe influenza. The decision is made to admit the patient, whose
condition has worsened and who is not responding to the therapy
initiated on the observation unit. The physician performs a detailed
history and a detailed physical examination to reflect the patient’s
current status. The patient’s problem is of low severity but requires
ongoing active management, with possible surgical consultation. The
MDM complexity is low.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
21 An 8-month-old infant, who is a new patient, is brought in by her
mother for diaper rash. The physician focuses on the problem of the
diaper rash for the problem focused history and examination. The
MDM complexity is straightforward.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
ICD-10-CM Code:
_______________________________________________________________________________
22 A 33-year-old man is brought to his private physician’s office by his
wife. The man, who is an established patient, has been experiencing
severe leg pain of 2 weeks’ duration. In the past 2 days, the patient has
experienced fainting spells, nausea, and vomiting. The patient has had
multiple other vague complaints over the past month that he
dismissed as unimportant, but his wife is not so sure, and she
describes his general health as deteriorating. The physician performs a
comprehensive multisystem physical examination after performing a
complete review of systems and a complete past medical, family, and
social history, with an extended history of the present illness
(comprehensive history). The physician has to consider an extensive
number of diagnoses, orders a variety of tests to be performed
immediately, and indicates the MDM complexity to be high.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________ (leg
pain), ________________ (fainting),
________________ (nausea with vomiting)
23 A 42-year-old woman, who is an established patient, visits her
family practitioner with the chief complaint of a self-discovered breast
lump. She describes a feeling of fullness and tenderness over the mass
that has become more pronounced in the past 2 weeks. Because the
patient is otherwise healthy and has had a physical within the past 6
months, the physician focuses his attention on the breast lump during
the taking of a problem focused history and the performance of a
problem focused physical examination. The physician orders an
immediate mammography to be performed and a follow-up
appointment in 5 days. The physician has given the patient no other
options and indicates that the MDM complexity is straightforward.
CPT Code:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
ICD-10-CM Code:
_______________________________________________________________________________
24 Contusion of left knee and right elbow due to fall from roof. (Do
not assign External Cause codes.)
ICD-10-CM Codes:
___________________________________,
__________________________________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
*
Definitions from Huffman E: 
Health Information Management,
 10th ed. Revised by the
American Medical Record Association. Berwyn, IL, Physician’s Record Company, 1994, pp
57-62.
**
Modified from Huffman E: 
Health Information Management,
 10th ed. Revised by the American
Medical Record Association. Berwyn, IL, Physician’s Record Company, 1994, pp 57-62.
^
Definitions from 2017 CPT, Evaluation and Management Guidelines, pp 6-7. CPT codes,
descriptions, and materials only are © 2016 American Medical Association.
CHAPTER 12
Anesthesia
 
Why did you choose coding as a profession?
“I enjoy surgery and reading about the different approaches that it
entails. Your profession should be something that you are passionate
about.”
Genieve R. Nottage, MBA, BSHA, CPC-I, CPC
Educator/Consultant
 
Chronicles Billing Inc.
 
Locust Grove, Georgia
CHAPTER TOPICS
Types of Anesthesia
Anesthesia Section Format
Formula for Anesthesia Payment
Concurrent Modifiers
Unlisted Anesthesia Code
Other Reporting
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Define types of anesthesia.
2 
Explain the format of the Anesthesia section and subsections.
3 
Understand the anesthesia formula.
4 
Identify other reporting issues.
5 
Demonstrate ability to report anesthesia services.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Types of anesthesia
The Anesthesia section is a specialized section that is used by an
anesthesiologist, anesthetist, or other physician to report the provision
of anesthesia services, usually during surgery. 
Anesthesia
 means
induction or administration of a drug to obtain partial or complete
loss of sensation. 
Analgesia
 (absence of pain) is achieved so that a
patient may have surgery or a procedure performed without pain.
Types of anesthesia may be general, regional, local, or monitored
anesthesia care (MAC). Moderate (conscious) sedation is not reported
with anesthesia codes but rather is reported with Medicine codes.
Local anesthesia is usually administered by the surgeon.
The practice of anesthesiology is not limited to administration of
anesthesia for the surgical patient. The American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) defines the practice of anesthesiology as
dealing with but not limited to the following:
■
 
The management of procedures for rendering a patient insensible to
pain and emotional stress during surgical, obstetrical, and other
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.
■
 
The evaluation and management of essential physiologic functions
under the stress of anesthetic and surgical manipulations.
■
 
The clinical management of the patient unconscious from whatever
cause.
■
 
The evaluation and management of acute or chronic pain.
■
 
The management of problems in cardiac and respiratory
resuscitation.
■
 
The application of specific methods of respiratory therapy.
■
 
The clinical management of various fluid, electrolyte, and metabolic
disturbances.
*
Take a moment and consult a good medical dictionary under the
entry “anesthesia.” You will find that in addition to the definition of
the term anesthesia, a wide variety of types of anesthesia are defined.
Some types of anesthesia are named for the site of the anesthesia
administration, such as sacral, lumbar, and caudal. Other types of
anesthesia are named for the category of anesthesia, such as freezing
(frost) for cryoanesthesia. Some of the more commonly used
anesthesia terms are endotracheal, epidural, regional, and patient-
controlled analgesia.
■
 
Endotracheal
 anesthesia is accomplished by insertion of a tube into
the nose or mouth, and passing the tube into the trachea for
ventilation, as illustrated in 
Fig. 12-1
.
■
 
Epidural
 anesthesia is the injection of an anesthetic agent into the
epidural spaces between the vertebrae, also known as peridural, or
epidural block.
■
 
Spinal
 or intraspinal anesthesia refers to anesthesia produced by an
injection of local anesthetic into the subarachnoid space around the
spinal cord.
■
 
General
 anesthesia is a state of unconsciousness that is
accomplished by the use of a drug or combination of drugs
administered intramuscularly, rectally, intravenously, or by
inhalation.
■
 
Regional
 anesthesia interrupts the sensory nerve conductivity in a
region of the body and is produced by a field block (forming a wall
of anesthesia around the site by means of local injections) or nerve
block (injection of the area close to the site). Nerve block is also
known as block, block anesthesia, or conduction anesthesia.
Although not a type of anesthesia, a procedure used by
anesthesiologists for treatment of a postdural puncture headache is
a blood patch, also known as an epidural blood patch (EBP). A
blood patch
 procedure is when a cerebrospinal fluid leak is closed
by means of an 
injection
 of the patient’s blood into the epidural
space at or near the area of the dural puncture that was accessed
during spinal anesthesia.
■
 
Local
 anesthesia can be accomplished by means of application of an
anesthetic agent (such as lidocaine) placed directly on the area
involved (
topical
 anesthesia) or local infiltration through
subcutaneous injection of an anesthetic agent. Lidocaine can be
subcutaneously injected, as illustrated in 
Fig. 12-2
.
■
 
Patient-controlled analgesia
 (PCA) is a system that allows the
patient to administer an analgesic drug such as morphine to control
pain.
 
 
FIGURE 12–1
A,
 Placement of endotracheal tube for administration of
anesthesia. 
B,
 General endotracheal anesthesia is a support system of
major importance.
 
FIGURE 12–2
Administration of local anesthesia.
A device is attached to a pump holding the drug and the patient can
depress a handheld button to administer a dose of the drug (
Fig. 12-3
).
In this way, the patient can control the amount of the drug and the
frequency of administration. PCA is considered a hospital service and
not generally reported by a physician. Refer to individual payer
guidelines for instructions to report PCA management.
 
QUICK CHECK 12-1
1. 
In the index of the CPT, you would reference this main term and
these two subterms to locate a blood patch code.
__________________________
(Answers located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
FIGURE 12–3
Patient-controlled analgesia.
Each type of anesthesia will be covered in depth, but generally
speaking, the types of anesthesia are:
■
 
Monitored Anesthesia Care
 (MAC)
MAC is provided by an anesthesiologist or
CRNA. The patient is monitored, and if
necessary, sedation is provided; even general
anesthesia.
■
 
General anesthesia
Used for cases that requires deep sedation, such
as open heart surgery or complicated
abdominal surgery. The patient is usually
intubated. The patient is in a deep state of
sedation and is not arousable or able to
communicate or follow commands. Several
different types of medication may be used
during general anesthesia, including drugs for
analgesia (pain relief), sedation, amnesiacs (to
lessen awareness), and paralytics for muscle
relaxation to prevent movement or reflexive
action by the patient during procedures.
■
 
Regional anesthesia
Regional anesthesia uses injection to target the
nerves of the area being treated.
■
 
Spinal and epidural anesthesia
Spinal anesthesia is administered into the cerebral
spinal fluid or epidural area of the spine that
corresponds with the area being treated. Spinals
are generally used for procedures below the
waist. Epidural catheters are often placed to
facilitate administration of medication into the
spinal region.
Moderate (conscious) sedation
Moderate or conscious sedation is a type of sedation that can be
provided by a surgeon or the surgeon’s staff while the surgeon is
performing a procedure; it provides a decreased level of
consciousness that does not put the patient completely to sleep. This
level of consciousness allows the patient to breathe without assistance
and to respond to stimulation and verbal commands. A trained
observer must be present when moderate sedation services are
provided by the same physician performing the therapeutic or
diagnostic service in order to assist the physician in monitoring the
patient. The codes to report conscious sedation are located in the
Medicine section (99151-99157), not in the Anesthesia section. Codes
99151-99153 report the moderate sedation services when the service is
provided by the same physician performing the diagnostic or
therapeutic service and requires the presence of an independent
trained observer. The codes are divided based on the patient’s age of
under or over 5 years of age and the duration of the service. Codes
99155-99157 report moderate sedation services when the anesthesia
service is provided by a physician other than the health care
professional performing the service. These codes are divided based on
the patient’s age of under or over 5 years of age and the duration of
the service. Bundled into these codes is the assessment of the patient,
establishment of intravenous access, administration of the sedation
agent, sedation maintenance, monitoring of patient vital signs, and
recovery from anesthesia.
The code descriptions for the Moderate (Conscious) Sedation codes
include the term “intraservice time.” 
Intraservice
 time begins with the
administration of the sedation agent, requires continuous face-to-face
attendance by the physician, and ends when the personal contact by
the physician ends. The time the physician spends with the patient in
assessment of the patient prior to administration of the sedation and
the time in recovery is not included in the intraservice time.
CODING SHOT
 
Moderate (conscious) sedation codes are only reported when the
physician performing the procedure administers the sedation and an
independent trained observer assists.
Moderate or conscious sedation methods are much less invasive
than anesthesia services that provide the complete loss of
consciousness. For example, for a colonoscopy, a physician could
administer an intravenous sedation, such as meperidine (Demerol),
morphine, or diazepam (Valium). The patient would be monitored
closely as the medication is administered so that the appropriate level
of sedation is reached. After the procedure, the physician may
administer a drug intravenously to reverse the effects of the sedation.
The patient would have this procedure in an outpatient setting and be
able to go home after the procedure.
 
CAUTION 
Do not confuse conscious sedation with monitored anesthesia care.
Conscious sedation is administered by the surgeon or another physician;
MAC is provided by an anesthesiologist or CRNA.
Anesthesia section format
Most anesthesia codes are divided first by anatomic site and then by
specific type of procedure, as shown in 
Fig. 12-4
.
FIGURE 12–4
Anatomic divisions in Anesthesia section.
The last four subsections in Anesthesia—Radiologic Procedures
(01916-01936), Burn Excisions or Debridement (01951-01953), Obstetric
(01958-01969), and Other Procedures (01990-01999)—are not
organized by anatomic division. The CPT codes in the Radiologic
Procedures subsection report anesthesia service when radiologic
services are provided to the patient for diagnostic or therapeutic
reasons.
Example
Therapeutic
reason:
01925
Anesthesia for therapeutic interventional radiological procedures involving the arterial system;
carotid and coronary
Diagnostic
reason:
01922
Anesthesia for non-invasive imaging or radiation therapy
Anesthesia providers may be a(n):
■
 
Anesthesiologist
■
 
Certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA)
■
 
Anesthesiologist’s assistant (who may not work without oversight
of anesthesiologist)
■
 
Resident (cannot bill if the case is performed without the
participation of another anesthesia provider)
■
 
Student registered nurse anesthetist (billing is based on specific
rules for each payer depending on the payer’s definition of medical
direction)
EXERCISE 12-1
Anesthesia Format
Complete the following exercise:
1 
Which subsections are 
not
 divided by anatomic site?
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
What is analgesia?
_________________________________________________________________________________
3 
What is anesthesia?
________________________________________________________________________________
4 
Name three types of anesthesia: ________________,
________________, and ________________.
5 
What is the type of sedation that enables the patient to maintain
breathing for himself/herself?
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
6 
In what section of the CPT are the sedation codes identified in
Question 5 located?
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Formula for anesthesia payment
When an anesthesiologist provides an anesthesia service to a patient,
the preoperative, intraoperative/intraservice (care during surgery),
and postoperative care are all included in the CPT code. These
services include the usual preoperative and postoperative visits (on
day of surgery) to the patient by the anesthesiologist; the routine
intraoperative care, such as administration of fluids and/or blood; and
the usual monitoring services. The care also includes the patient’s
history taken by the anesthesiologist, ventilation establishment, and
administration of preoperative and postoperative medications.
Monitoring services include blood pressure, temperature, arterial
oxygen levels (oximetry), exhalation of carbon dioxide (capnography),
and spectrometry (blood analysis). The intraoperative care includes
intubation to administer anesthesia. Postoperative care usually
includes pain management. Some pain management is reported
separately, e.g., spinal injection for significant postoperative pain. If
the anesthesiologist provides care that is unusual or beyond that
which would usually be provided, these services can be reported in
addition to the basic anesthesia service. For example, if the patient
requires intraoperative cardiac monitoring, the anesthesiologist may
insert a Swan-Ganz catheter, as illustrated in 
Fig. 12-5
.
 
FIGURE 12–5
Swan-Ganz catheter.
A Swan-Ganz catheter is not a normal service provided during a
surgery, so it could be reported using a code from the Medicine
section for placement of a flow-directed catheter (93503). Some payers
will require modifier -59 (distinct procedural service) be appended to
the catheter code if another central line is also placed. The time
necessary to insert the catheter is not counted in the anesthesia time
because the service of the insertion is reported separately and is
considered a surgical procedure. Reporting the insertion separately
and also adding the insertion time to the anesthesia service would
result in double payment for the insertion service.
 
QUICK CHECK 12-2
1. 
Where is the information regarding Anesthesia Service located
within the CPT manual?
_____________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in Appendix C
)
What makes anesthesia coding different from any other coding is
the way in which anesthesia services are billed. There is a standard
formula for payment of anesthesia services that is, for the most part,
nationally accepted. The formula is base units + time units +
modifying units (B + T + M) × conversion factor. Let’s look at each of
these elements in more detail.
Another tool is the ASA CROSSWALK book from the American
Society of Anesthesiologists and it provides anesthesia coders with a
comprehensive list of CPT codes that link to the corresponding
anesthesia code(s). This book also lists the base value of each
anesthesia service. CPT codes are located in the crosswalk book
enabling the anesthesia coder to select the service with the highest
base value for submission. The book also lists alternative codes,
allowing the anesthesia coder to make the most specific selection. The
anesthesia crosswalk book is updated by the ASA annually.
B is for base unit
The ASA publishes a 
Relative Value Guide
® (RVG), which contains
codes for anesthesia services and the base unit value for each
anesthesia code. The CPT manual also contains these anesthesia
service codes in the Anesthesia section. Italicized comments appear in
the American Society of Anesthesiologists’ 
Relative Value Guide
® to
clarify code assignment, as illustrated in 
Fig. 12-6
. These italicized
comments are not part of the CPT manual.
 
CODING SHOT
Anesthesia is paid based on:
• 
Base units +
• 
Time units +
• 
Modifying units (if allowed) × conversion factor
FIGURE 12–6
The 
Relative Value Guide
®
 contains italicized
comments that do not appear in the code description in the
CPT.
 Source: (Excerpted from 
2016 Relative Value Guide
®
,
 © 2015 The American
Society of Anesthesiologists. All Rights Reserved. 
Relative Value Guide is a registered
trademark of the American Society of Anesthesiologists
. A copy of the full text can be
obtained from ASA, 1061 American Lane, Schaumburg, Illinois, 60173-4973.)
CMS’s base units. 
The RVG is not a fee schedule (a list of charges for services) but
instead compares anesthesia services with each other. For example,
anesthesia services provided for a biopsy of a sinus are less
complicated than services provided for a radical sinus surgery. A
team of physicians with expertise in anesthesiology developed the
comparisons and assigned numerical values to each service, termed
the 
base unit value
 (
Fig. 12-7
). Annually, CMS also publishes a list of
the base unit values for the codes, as illustrated in 
Fig. 12-8
.
 
FIGURE 12–7
The ASA’s 
Relative Value Guide
®
 lists the Base Unit
value for the codes.
 Source: (Excerpted from 
2016 Relative Value Guide
®
,
 © 2015
The American Society of Anesthesiologists. All Rights Reserved. 
Relative Value Guide is
a registered trademark of the American Society of Anesthesiologists
. A copy of the full
text can be obtained from ASA, 1061 American Lane, Schaumburg, Illinois, 60173-
4973.)
FIGURE 12–8
CMS’s annual list of base units.
The CMS’s base unit value is accepted as the standard in the United
States for most third-party payers.
One coding circumstance unique to anesthesia coding occurs when
multiple surgical procedures are performed during the same session.
In this case, only the procedure with the highest base unit value is
assigned. For example, if during the same surgical procedure session a
clavicle biopsy (base unit value of 3) and a radical mastectomy (base
unit value of 5) are performed, the base unit value for both procedures
becomes 5. The anesthesia service is then reported with only the code
for the higher base unit value. However, keep in mind that add-on
codes still apply in anesthesia coding and cannot be reported alone;
thus you would only assign along with the primary code if required
by the service.
CMS RULES
For Medicare, anesthesia service involving multiple procedures is
reported with the CPT anesthesia code for the procedure with the
highest base unit value. The actual total time for all procedures is
reported. Only one anesthesia code can be reported. There is an
exception for the add-on codes for burn excision or debridement
(01953) and obstetrics (01968, 01969).
The pricing for add-on anesthesia codes is different than other
payers because only the base unit value of the add-on code is allowed
and all anesthesia time is reported with the primary anesthesia code.
There is an exception to this rule when reporting obstetrical
anesthesia, as both the base unit value and time units for the primary
and add-on, obstetrical codes are reported.
T is for time
Anesthesia services are provided based on the time during which the
anesthesia was administered and calculated, in total minutes. The
timing is started when the anesthesiologist begins preparing the
patient to receive anesthesia and is in constant attendance with the
patient, continues through the procedure, and ends when the patient
is turned over to the 
post-anesthesia caregivers. The minutes during
which anesthesia was administered are recorded in the patient record.
Carriers independently determine the amount of time that is
considered a unit. Often, 15 minutes equal a unit, but for some
carriers, 1, 10, or 30 minutes equals a unit.
CMS RULES
For Medicare, time units are computed by dividing the reported
actual anesthesia service time by 15 minutes and then rounding to
one decimal place. No time units are reported for anesthesia CPT
codes 01953 and 01996. Medicare reimburses for anesthesia services
based on a combination of time and base units multiplied by a
geographic-area-specific conversion factor.
The start time on the anesthesia record should match the time
reported on the claim form. The recorded time on all records must be
the same:
■
 
Anesthesia record
■
 
CRNA, anesthesiologist, or resident billing slip
■
 
Time on all documents submitted to insurance company
When completing the Medicare claim, always record the actual time
—that is, the time the anesthesia provider spent personally attending
the patient. Many private payers also require actual time, so it is
necessary to verify time submission requirements with each payer.
Private payers may or may not reimburse CRNA services, or they
may require these services be reported under the supervising
anesthesiologist’s name and NPI (National Provider Identification)
number. You must verify the method for submission for each payer.
When preparing the claim, always record the actual time that
indicates the ending time of personal attendance. The time is
illustrated in 
Fig. 12-9
, 
A
. The stop time is when the patient can be
safely turned over to a non-anesthesia provider. This generally does
not occur in the operating room.
FIGURE 12–9A
Anesthesia medical record.
The start time on the anesthesia record should match the time
reported on the claim form and indicate the beginning time of the
service. Note that 
Fig. 12-9
, 
B
 illustrates the medical document that
contains the pre-anesthesia evaluation that the provider completes
prior to the start of surgery.
 
From the Trenches
“Continue to educate yourself. Don’t second guess your initial thoughts,
only code what is documented.”
GENIEVE
FIGURE 12–9B
Anesthesia medical record, pre-anesthesia evaluation
and post-anesthesia notes.
M is for modifying unit
As the name implies, modifying units reflect circumstances or
conditions that change or modify the environment in which the
anesthesia service is provided. There are two base-modifying factors:
qualifying circumstances codes and physical status modifiers.
Qualifying circumstances. 
At times, anesthesia is provided in situations that make the
administration of the anesthesia more difficult. These types of cases
include those that are performed in emergency situations and those
dealing with patients of extreme age. They also include services
performed during the use of controlled hypotension or the use of total
body hypothermia (refer to 
Fig. 12-10
). The Qualifying Circumstances
codes begin with 99 and 
are considered 
adjunct codes,
 which means
that the codes can never be reported alone but must be used in
addition to another code to provide additional information. A
Qualifying Circumstances code is reported in addition to the
anesthesia procedure code. Qualifying Circumstances codes are
located in two places in the CPT manual: the Medicine section and the
Anesthesia section Guidelines. In both locations the plus symbol is
located next to the codes (99100-99140), indicating their status as add-
on codes.
 
STOP 
You were just presented with some very important information about the use
of certain codes in the CPT manual. The plus (+) symbol next to any CPT
code—not just next to Qualifying Circumstances codes—indicates that that
code cannot be used alone. Throughout the remaining sections of the CPT
manual, the plus symbol will appear to caution you to use the code only as
an adjunct code (with other codes).
FIGURE 12–10
Qualifying Circumstances with relative
value.
 Source: (Excerpted from 
2016 Relative Value Guide
®
,
 © 2015 The American
Society of Anesthesiologists. All Rights Reserved. 
Relative Value Guide is a registered
trademark of the American Society of Anesthesiologists
. A copy of the full text can be
obtained from ASA, 1061 American Lane, Schaumburg, Illinois, 60173-4973.)
When used, the Qualifying Circumstances code is reported in
addition to the primary anesthesia procedure code. For example, if
anesthesia was provided for an 80-year-old patient during a corrective
lens procedure, the reporting would be:
00142
Anesthesia for procedures on eye; lens surgery
99100
Anesthesia for 80-year-old patient
The RVG lists the Qualifying Circumstances codes along with the
relative value for each code (see 
Fig. 12-10
).
The CPT index lists the Qualifying Circumstances codes under
Anesthesia, Special Circumstances.
Physical status modifiers. 
The second type of modifying unit used in the Anesthesia section is
the physical status modifier (refer to 
Fig. 12-11
). These modifiers
indicate 
the patient’s condition at the time anesthesia was
administered and identify the level of complexity of the services
provided to the patient. For instance, anesthesia service to a gravely ill
patient is much more complex than the same type of service to a
normal, healthy patient. The physical status modifier is not assigned
by the coder but is determined by the anesthesiologist and
documented in the anesthesia record. The physical status modifier
begins with the letter “P” and contains a number from 1 to 6 (see 
Fig.
12-11
).
 
FIGURE 12–11
Physical status modifiers.
 Source: (Excerpted from 
2016
Relative Value Guide
®
,
 © 2015 The American Society of Anesthesiologists. All Rights
Reserved. 
Relative Value Guide is a registered trademark of the American Society of
Anesthesiologists
. A copy of the full text can be obtained from ASA, 1061 American
Lane, Schaumburg, Illinois, 60173-4973.)
Note that the relative value for P1, P2, and P6 is zero because these
conditions are considered not to affect the service provided. A
physical status modifier is used after the five-digit CPT code and is
illustrated in 
Fig. 12-12
.
FIGURE 12–12
Anesthesia code and modifier.
Summing it up!
Most health care facilities have software that automatically performs
the conversion calculations based on the various conversion factors
and unit designations. However, you still need to understand the
process used to convert the anesthesia formula into the anesthesia
payment. Let’s put the elements of the equation to practical use by
applying the equation (B + T + M) to a case.
An 84-year-old female (qualifying circumstance for extreme age,
value 1) with severe hypertension (value of 1) has a 4-cm malignant
lesion removed from her right knee (base value of 3). The total time of
anesthesia service was 60 minutes, and the carrier indicates a unit is 15
minutes (4 units). The anesthesiologist recorded that the patient’s
physical status at the time of the procedure was P3 for a severe
systemic disease (relative value of 1), for the severe hypertension.
3
base procedure value
4
time units
2
modifiers: physical status = 1; extreme age = 1
9
total units
The coding that identifies all elements of this case would be:
00400-
P3
Anesthesia for procedure of integumentary system of knee for a patient with severe systemic disease (severe
hypertension)
99100
Anesthesia for an 84-year-old patient
9
Units at the third-party payer established rate per unit
Conversion factor. 
A conversion factor is the dollar value of each unit. Each third-party
payer issues a list of conversion factors. The lists vary with geographic
location because the cost of practicing medicine varies from one
region to another. 
Fig. 12-13
 shows an example of a third-party
payer’s (CMS) anesthesia conversion factors. Note that North Dakota
is $21.39 per unit and Manhattan, NY, is $24.50 per unit, as it is less
expensive to provide anesthesia services in Grand Forks, ND, than it
is to provide the same services in Manhattan, NY.
FIGURE 12–13
2016 CMS Anesthesia Conversion Factors.
The conversion factor for the locale is multiplied by the number of
units for the procedure. For example, the previous case had 9 units. If
the anesthesiologist was located in Manhattan, NY, and the
conversion factor is $24.50, the total for the procedure would be
$220.50 (9 × $24.50). If the same services were provided in North
Dakota, with the conversion factor of $21.39, the total for the
procedure would be $192.51 (9 × $21.39).
 The CMS website posts the
anesthesia base unit values and conversion factors at
www.cms.gov/center/anesth.asp
Multiple procedures
■
 
When multiple surgical procedures are performed during a single
anesthetic administration, the anesthesia code that represents the
highest base value unit procedure is reported. The time reported is
the combined total for all procedures.
■
 
Assign the code for procedure of highest base value unit.
■
 
Indicate cumulative start/stop time for all surgical procedures
performed.
Anesthesia time for a medically necessary surgical procedure
performed during the same intra-operative session as a cosmetic
procedure should be split and reported separately.
 
CODING SHOT
According to Medicare rules, modifier -50 would not be used on
anesthesia CPT codes. It would be used on anesthesia surgical
procedures, performed by anesthesiologists, such as femoral
continuous blocks for pain management for bilateral knee
replacement (64448-59-50), in addition to the ASA code or anesthesia
CPT code.
EXERCISE 12-2
Modifiers and Time in Anesthesia
Complete the following:
1 
If the anesthesia service was provided to a patient who had mild
systemic disease, what would the physical status modifier likely be?
____________
2 
If the same service was provided to a patient who had severe
systemic disease, what would the physical status modifier likely be?
____________
3 
Anesthesia complicated by utilization of total body hypothermia
Code: ___________________
4 
When filling out the claim, always record the ___________________
time, which indicates the ending time of the time spent personally
attending to the patient for anesthesia services.
5 
___________________ time is that time when the anesthesia care of
the patient can be safely turned over to a non-anesthesia provider.
This generally never happens in the operating room.
6 
The ___________________ time on the anesthesia record should
match the time reported on the claim form and indicates the
beginning time of the anesthesia service.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Concurrent modifiers
Some third-party payers require additional modifiers to indicate how
many cases an anesthesiologist was performing or directing at one
time. Certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) may administer
anesthesia to patients under the direction of a licensed physician, or
they may work independently. An anesthesiologist may medically
direct up to four cases at the same time (concurrently). If a physician
directs more than four cases, it is referred to as medical supervision.
Medical direction means the directing anesthesiologist is present at
the induction and emergence from anesthesia, for all key portions of
the procedure, and is immediately available in case of an emergency.
The CRNA would be with the patient the entire time.
CMS RULES
When medical direction occurs, certain documentation must be
submitted for services for Medicare patients. The documentation
must support that certain services were personally performed by the
physician. These include:
1. 
Pre-anesthesia examination and evaluation
2. 
Prescription of an anesthesia plan
3. 
Personally participates in the most demanding procedures in the
anesthesia plan, including induction and emergence
4. 
Ensures that any procedures in the anesthesia plan that he or she
does not perform are performed by a qualified anesthetist
5. 
Monitors the course of anesthesia administration at frequent
intervals
6. 
Remains physically present and available for immediate diagnosis
and treatment of emergencies
7. 
Provides indicated post-anesthesia care (42 C.F.R. 415.110
Conditions for Payment: Medically directed anesthesia services)
Additional modifiers that define the types of providers involved in
anesthesia are:
-AA
Anesthesia services performed personally by an anesthesiologist
-AD
Medical supervision by a physician; more than 4 concurrent anesthesia procedures
-G8
Monitored anesthesia care (MAC) for deep, complex, complicated, or markedly invasive surgical procedure
-G9
Monitored anesthesia care for patient who has a history of severe cardiopulmonary condition
-QK
Medical direction of two, three, or four concurrent anesthesia procedures involving qualified individuals
-QS
Monitored anesthesia care service
-QX
Certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA) service, with medical direction by a physician
-QY
Medical direction of one certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA) by an anesthesiologist
-QZ
CRNA service, without medical direction by a physician
These modifiers are not CPT modifiers but HCPCS modifiers and
further define the anesthesia services provided. Anesthesia modifiers
are always placed first after the CPT anesthesia code. These anesthesia
modifiers are pricing modifiers and are listed first to assure correct
reimbursement.
 
QUICK CHECK 12-3
1. 
What is the difference between modifiers QX and QY?
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 12-3
Modifiers
Using
 
Appendix A
 
of the CPT manual, identify the following CPT
modifiers:
1 
Increased Procedural Services _____________
2 
Unusual Anesthesia ____________
Using the descriptions for the preceding HCPCS modifiers, answer
the following questions. Which modifier would be used to identify:
3 
Medical supervision by a physician of more than 4 concurrent
anesthesia procedures? ____________
4 
Monitored anesthesia care service? ____________
5 
CRNA medical direction by a physician? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Unlisted anesthesia code
In the Anesthesia section, an unlisted procedure code is available and
is located under the Other Procedures subsection in the Anesthesia
section. When there is no CPT code to indicate the anesthesia services,
the unlisted Anesthesia code (01999) may be reported.
EXERCISE 12-4
Anesthesia Codes
Complete the following:
1 
What is the unlisted anesthesia procedure code?
Code: ____________________
Locate anesthesia procedures in the CPT manual index under the
entry “Anesthesia” and then subtermed by the anatomic site. Write
the CPT index location on the line provided (e.g., Anesthesia,
Thyroid). Then locate the code(s) identified in the Anesthesia section
of the CPT manual. Choose the correct code(s) and write the code(s)
on the line provided.
2 
Needle biopsy of the thyroid (neck)
Index location: ____________________
Code: ____________________
3 
Cesarean section, delivery only
Index location: ____________________
Code: ____________________
4 
Transurethral resection of the prostate
Index location: ____________________
Code: ____________________
5 
Repair of cleft palate
Index location: ____________________
Code: ____________________
6 
Repair of ruptured Achilles tendon without graft
Index location: ____________________
Code: ____________________
Using the following information and the B + T + M formula,
calculate the payment for the anesthesia services.
For the following questions a time unit will be 15 minutes. Base
unit value for each case is provided within the questions. Refer to 
Fig.
12-13
 for the conversion factors used in these questions; to 
Fig. 12-10
for the value of the Qualifying Circumstances; and to 
Fig. 12-11
 for
the value of the Physical Status Modifiers.
7 
A needle biopsy lasting 15 minutes was conducted in North Dakota
on a normal, healthy 75-year-old patient. The base unit value for the
service is 3.
Anesthesia payment: ____________________
8 
A patient with diabetes mellitus, controlled by diet and exercise,
undergoes a 60-minute anesthesia period for a transurethral
resection of the prostate (base unit value of 5). Calculate the
anesthesia rate if the procedure were performed in the following
locales:
a 
Manhattan ____________________
b 
North Carolina ____________________
9 
A cesarean section was conducted in Alfred, NY, on a patient with
preeclampsia (1 modifying unit). The base unit value for the service
is 7. Calculate the anesthesia rates for procedures lasting two
different lengths of time (refer to 
Fig. 12-13
 for conversion rates):
a 
30-minute procedure ____________________
b 
45-minute procedure ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Other reporting
Return to operating room
If a patient is returned to the operating room on the same day for the
same or a related procedure, and the same individual is performing
the second procedure, report the service with modifier -76. For
example, the anesthesiologist provides the service for an upper
gastrointestinal endoscopic procedure and reports the service 00740-
AA. Later that day, the patient is returned for a lower intestinal
endoscopic procedure. The second service would be reported 00810-
AA-76. If that second procedure was performed by another
anesthesiologist, the second service would be reported 00810-AA-77.
Pre-anesthetic examination
If the pre-anesthetic examination was provided by an anesthesiologist
for a patient who did not undergo surgery, the E/M service would be
reported for consideration for reimbursement.
TOOLBOX 12-1
 
The patient presents for transabdominal repair of a diaphragmatic
hernia. The patient has severe diabetes, but the surgeon indicates the
patient is stable and able to undergo the procedure. The
anesthesiologist provides medical direction for one CRNA.
Questions
1.
 What modifier identifies the medical direction for the
anesthesiologist? _______________
2.
 What code reports anesthesia services for a transabdominal repair
of a diaphragmatic hernia? ______________________________
3.
 What would be the physical status modifier documented in the
medical record? ____________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 12, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What type of sedation is not reported with anesthesia codes but
rather reported with Medicine codes? _________________
2 Most anesthesia codes are divided by what site?
____________________________________________________________
3 The formula for anesthesia services is based on what three units?
______________________________________________
4 Physical status modifiers indicate the patient’s
____________________________ at the time anesthesia was
administered.
5 This anesthesia modifier indicates medical direction of two, three, or
four concurrent anesthesia procedures involving qualified
individuals.
_________________________________________________________________________________
Chapter 12, part I, theory
Complete the following:
1 Anesthesia services are based on ____________________ time the
patient is under the anesthesiologist’s care. Calculation of units of
time is determined by the third-party payer.
2 Anesthesia time begins when the anesthesiologist begins preparing
the patient to receive ___________________________, continues
through the procedure, and ends when the patient is no longer under
the personal _________________________ of the
________________________.
3 According to the Anesthesia Guidelines, what is the one modifier
that is not used with anesthesia procedures? (Make sure to include a
dash in front of your modifier answer. -XX)
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
4 “P1” is an example of what type of modifier?
___________________________________________________ (two words)
5 What word means “in a dying state”?
_____________________________________________________________________
6 What word means “affecting the body as a whole”?
__________________________________________________________
7 The letter “P” in combination with what number indicates a brain-
dead patient? ______________________ (use numeral)
8 What type of circumstance identifies a component of anesthesia
service that affects the character of the service?
___________________________________________________________________________________________________
9 Anesthesia procedures are divided by what type of site?
___________________
10 According to the Anesthesia Guidelines, the Separate or Multiple
Procedures section, when multiple surgical procedures are performed
during a single anesthetic administration, the anesthesia code
representing the most ____________________ procedure is reported
and the time reported is the
_______________________________________ total for all procedures.
11 Is it true that a physician who personally administers the
anesthesia to the patient upon whom he or she is operating cannot bill
the third-party payer?
_______________________________________________________________________
12 What is the name of the guide that is published by the American
Society of Anesthesiologists and provides the weights of various
anesthesia services?
_______________________________________________________________®
(three words)
Chapter 12, part II, practical
Using your CPT manual, identify the modifier for the following descriptions
(Separate multiple codes with a comma and then a space in your response.
XXXXX, XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier
answers. XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces.
XXXXX x X):
13 Anesthesia for tendon repair of the shoulder, normal, healthy
patient
Anesthesia Code: ___________________
14 Anesthesia for a cesarean hysterectomy following neuraxial labor
anesthesia, normal, healthy patient
Anesthesia Codes: ___________________,
___________________
15 Anesthesia for a missed abortion procedure in which the mother is
in grave danger of death
Anesthesia Code: ___________________
16 Cranioplasty for a depressed skull fracture, simple, extradural, for
a patient with mild diabetes, well-controlled
Anesthesia Code: ___________________
17 Total hip replacement in a 75-year-old patient with hypertension
that is well controlled with medication
Anesthesia Codes: ___________________
18 Burn excision of 5% of the total body surface with skin grafting of
the abdomen. Patient is 9 months old and in stable condition.
Anesthesia Code: ____________________
19 Hospital management of a continuous epidural drug delivery
system for 5 days
Anesthesia Code: ___________________
20 Arthroscopic total wrist replacement in a normal, healthy patient
Anesthesia Code: ___________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
*
Definitions excerpted from the 
2016 Relative Value Guide
®
,
 © 2015 The American Society of
Anesthesiologists. All Rights Reserved. 
Relative Value Guide is a registered trademark of the
American Society of Anesthesiologists
. A copy of the full text can be obtained from ASA, 1061
American Lane, Schaumburg, Illinois, 60173-4973.
CHAPTER 13
Surgery guidelines and general
surgery
 
“Learn conflict resolution skills that use a ‘winwin’ approach and create
the proper atmosphere for resolving differences and working together
as a team. Maintain a positive sense of self-esteem.”
Robert H. Ekvall, PhD, CCS, COC, CPC
Coder/Biller
 
Scripps Green Hospital
 
La Jolla, California
CHAPTER TOPICS
Introduction to the Surgery Section
Notes and Guidelines
Unlisted Procedures
Special Reports
Separate Procedure
Surgical Package
General Subsection
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Understand the Surgery section format.
2 
Locate notes and Guidelines in the Surgery section.
3 
State the use of the unlisted procedure codes.
4 
Interpret elements of a special report.
5 
Examine the separate procedure designation.
6 
Analyze the contents of a surgical package.
7 
Determine the contents of the General Subsection.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Introduction to the surgery section
The Surgery section is the largest in the CPT manual. The codes range
from 10021 to 69990. Surgery is divided into subsections. Most
Surgery subsections are defined according to medical specialty or
body system (e.g., integumentary or respiratory). Take a moment to
review the Surgery subsections of the CPT manual so you have an
understanding of the content of this important section.
Within the Surgery section, some of the more complex subsections
are the Integumentary, Musculoskeletal, Respiratory, Cardiovascular,
Digestive, and Female Genital subsections. Before we get into the
details of the subsections, let’s look at the general information that is
pertinent to the entire Surgery section.
Notes and guidelines
Guidelines are found at the beginning of each of the CPT sections. The
section Guidelines define terms that are necessary to know for
appropriately interpreting and reporting the procedures and services
contained in the section. The following is an example of the type of
information located in the Surgery Guidelines:
■
 
Services: A reference explaining how to assign E/M codes
■
 
CPT Surgical Package Definition: Defines what is included in the
surgical procedure
■
 
Follow-up Care for Diagnostic Procedures: Defines follow-up care
for diagnostic services
■
 
Follow-up Care for Therapeutic Surgical Procedures: Defines
follow-up care for therapeutic surgical services
■
 
Supplied Materials: Describes how and when to report supplies
■
 
Reporting More Than One Procedure/Service: Identifies situations in
which it may be appropriate to use modifiers for multiple services
provided on the same day
■
 
Separate Procedure: How to assign codes with this designation
■
 
Unlisted Service or Procedure: Unlisted service codes from the
Surgery section
■
 
Special Report: What to include and when to submit a special report
■
 
Surgical Destruction: Clarifies that destruction can be accomplished
by any method, and that there are limited exceptions when the
method is coded separately
An index at the beginning of each subsection within the Surgery
section, lists subheadings, categories, and subcategories with
instructional notes.
 
QUICK CHECK 13-1
1. 
A listing of subsections that have instructional notes is not included
in the Surgical section Guidelines.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
The 
Guidelines
 contain information that you will need to know in
order to correctly code in the section, and most of the information is
not repeated elsewhere in the section. So always review the
Guidelines before coding in the section. Remember that with each
new edition of the CPT manual, you will need to review the
Guidelines for any changes. The changes are indicated by the “New or
Revised Text” symbols used throughout the CPT manual (
Fig. 13-1
).
Note that the content of the figures is only for illustration, and the
current year CPT may not display the information as stated in these
text figures.
FIGURE 13–1
New or revised text symbol.
Common throughout the CPT manual are notes. Notes may appear
before subsections (
Fig. 13-2
), subheadings (
Fig. 13-3
), categories (
Fig.
13-4
), and subcategories (
Fig. 13-5
).
 
FIGURE 13–2
Subsection notes.
 
FIGURE 13–3
Subheading notes.
FIGURE 13–4
Category notes.
FIGURE 13–5
Subcategory notes.
The information in the notes indicates the special instructions
unique to particular codes or groups of codes. The notes are extremely
important because the information contained in 
them is not usually
available in the section Guidelines. Always make it a practice to read
any notes available before coding. If notes are present, they must be
followed if the coding is to be accurate. Make it a practice to write in
your coding manuals. Highlight important points, make notes in the
margins, and personalize your coding manual. You will find these
personal annotations are very helpful as you code.
Additional information is enclosed in parentheses, called
parenthetical phrases or expressions. They sometimes follow the code
or group of codes and provide further information about codes that
may be applicable. For example, 42120, Resection of the palate or
extensive resection of a lesion, is followed by information about codes
you would assign if reconstruction of the palate followed the resection
(
Fig. 13-6
).
 
FIGURE 13–6
Additional helpful information in parentheses.
Deleted codes are also indicated in the CPT manual, enclosed in
parentheses. Often the code that is to be used in place of the deleted
code will be listed (
Fig. 13-7
). 
Appendix B
 of the CPT manual has a
summary of code additions, deletions, and revisions for the current
year.
FIGURE 13–7
Deleted codes in parentheses.
Also note in 
Fig. 13-7
 that the arrows at the beginning and end of
the information indicate that the information is new or has been
revised for the current edition.
Unlisted procedures
The Surgery Guidelines contain many unlisted procedure codes,
presented by anatomic site. These unlisted codes are presented in
numeric order by their location in the Surgery section Guidelines and
in the subsections by body system. For example, the unlisted
procedure code for procedures of the forearm or wrist, 25999, is
located in the Surgery Guidelines and also at the end of the
subheading Forearm and Wrist. The unlisted codes identify
procedures or services throughout the Surgery section for which there
is no CPT code. If a Category III code is available for the unlisted
service you are reporting, you must use the Category III code, not the
unlisted Category I code. Reimbursement for Category III codes will
vary by payer.
 
QUICK CHECK 13-2
1. 
Before you can assign an unlisted code, you must first be certain
there is no more specific code and that there is not a Category
____________ code available.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
From the Trenches
“Understand all the different types of devices/tools and what they are
generally used for so you can learn which CPT codes were involved in the
surgery.”
ROBERT
EXERCISE 13-1
Unlisted Procedures
Using the CPT manual, locate the unlisted procedure codes in the
Surgical Guidelines and identify the unlisted procedure codes for the
following anatomic areas:
1 
Musculoskeletal system, general
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Inner ear
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Skin, mucous membrane, and subcutaneous tissue
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Leg or ankle
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Nervous system
CPT Code: ____________________
6 
Eyelids
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Special reports
When using an unlisted procedure code to report a surgical service, a
special report describing the procedure must accompany the claim.
According to the CPT manual, “Pertinent information 
[in the special
report]
 should include an adequate definition or description of the
nature, extent,
 and 
need
 for the procedure, and the 
time, effort,
 and
equipment
 necessary to provide the service.”
 
CAUTION 
Unlisted codes are assigned only after thorough research fails to reveal a
more specific code.
Example
When the first total disc arthroplasty (artificial disc) was performed
there was no code to report the service, so a special report would
have been submitted. The report contained a detailed description of
the procedure, why it was being performed, the extent of the
procedure, the length of time the procedure required, and the
equipment necessary. Later, there was a Category III code to describe
this procedure (0090T). When the procedure gained approval, 0090T
was deleted and a Category I code was created.
Medical supplier representatives may be of assistance to you in
obtaining the information necessary to support the use of the new
technique used during the procedure.
Separate procedure
Some procedure codes will have the words “separate procedure” after
the descriptor. The term “separate procedure” does not mean that the
procedure was the only procedure that was performed; rather, it is an
indication of how the code can be assigned. Locate code 19100 in the
CPT manual. The breast biopsy code 19100 has the words “(separate
procedure)” after the 
description. Procedures followed by the words
“separate procedure” (in parentheses) are considered 
minor
procedures that are reported only when they are the only services
performed or when they are performed with another major procedure
but at a different site or unrelated to the major procedure. When the
minor procedure is performed in conjunction with a related major
procedure, the minor procedure is considered incidental and is
bundled into the code for the major procedure.
Example
Separate procedure bundled into the major procedure:
 Breast biopsy
(19100) has “separate procedure” after it. If a breast biopsy was
performed in conjunction with a modified radical mastectomy
(19307), only the mastectomy would be reported. Because the breast
biopsy and the mastectomy were conducted on the same body area
during the same surgery, the breast biopsy would be considered a
minor procedure that was incidental and would be bundled into the
major procedure of the mastectomy. Exception: A scenario when the
“separate procedure” would not be bundled can be illustrated in the
following example. A patient has a percutaneous breast biopsy
(19100) performed and then is brought back to the operating room for
extensive tissue removal by subcutaneous mastectomy (19304) on the
same day. The second procedure would have modifier -58 (Staged or
related procedure or service by the same individual during the
postoperative period) appended to the code (19304-58).
Example
Two separate procedures:
 If a breast biopsy (19100 a separate procedure)
was performed in conjunction with an esophagoscopy (43200), both
the breast biopsy and the esophagoscopy would be reported. The
breast biopsy and the esophagoscopy were performed on different
body areas and, as such, the breast biopsy would not be bundled into
the esophagoscopy procedure.
Example
Separate procedure bundled into the major procedure.
 Salpingo-
oophorectomy (58720—removal of tubes and ovaries) has “separate
procedure” after it. If a salpingo-oophorectomy was performed in
conjunction with an abdominal hysterectomy (removal of the uterus,
58150), only the hysterectomy would be reported. Because the
salpingo-oophorectomy and the abdominal hysterectomy were
conducted on the same body area, the salpingo-oophorectomy would
be bundled into the more major procedure of the hysterectomy.
Example
Two separate procedures:
 If a salpingo-oophorectomy (58720—separate
procedure) was performed in conjunction with an esophagoscopy
(43200), both the salpingo-oophorectomy and the esophagoscopy
would be reported. Because the salpingo-oophorectomy and the
esophagoscopy were conducted on different body areas, the salpingo-
oophorectomy is considered a separate procedure, not a minor
procedure incidental to a major procedure.
 
From the Trenches
“Learn how to read and abstract a medical report to know which CPT codes
apply to what occurred in the operation, surgery, or medical procedure.
Doctors don’t often use the words that the CPT code describes.”
ROBERT
 
QUICK CHECK 13-3
1. 
When a minor procedure is performed with a more major
procedure of the same area, you would report both the minor and
major procedure.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Surgical package
Often, the time, effort, and services rendered when accomplishing a
procedure are bundled together to form a surgical package. Payment
is made for a package of services and not for each individual service
provided within the package. The CPT manual describes the surgical
package as including the operation itself, local anesthesia, and
“typical postoperative follow-up care,” one related E/M encounter
prior to the procedure, and immediate follow-up care, including
written orders. Read the information regarding the surgical package
in the Surgery Guidelines and highlight the “included” elements
because you will be referring back to this information as you report
surgical services.
The surgical package contains the components of:
■
 
Preoperative visits
■
 
Intraoperative services
■
 
Complications following surgery
■
 
Post-operative visits
■
 
Supplies
■
 
Miscellaneous service—dressing changes, catheter removal, etc.
Local anesthesia is defined as local infiltration, metacarpal/digital
block, or topical anesthesia. Follow-up care for complications,
exacerbations (a worsening), recurrence, and the presence of other
diseases that require additional services is not included in the surgical
package. General anesthesia for surgical procedures is not part of the
surgical package; general anesthesia services are reported separately
by the anesthesiologist.
Third-party payers have varying definitions of what constitutes a
surgical package and varying policies about what is included in the
surgical package. Surgical packages also define the services for which
you can or cannot submit additional charges because the rules of the
surgical package define what is and is not included with the surgical
procedure. Included in the definition of the surgical package are
routine preoperative and postoperative care—including minor
complications—and up to a predefined number of days before and
after the surgery. Reimbursement policies vary from payer to payer
because of the way each payer defines each surgical package. For
instance, Medicare states that they averaged the costs associated with
additional services for complications and added payments for those
services into the initial surgical payment. Other commercial payers
determine the reimbursement based on services associated only with
performing the surgery and choose to let costs for services for
complications be reported separately. The period of time following
each surgery that is included in the 
surgery package is established by
the third-party payer and is referred to as the 
global (postoperative)
surgery
 period. The global period is usually 
90
 days for major surgery
and 
10
 days for minor surgery.
Fig. 13-8
 shows CPT codes 10080 and 10081 for incision and
drainage of a pilonidal cyst. The third-party payer may indicate that
code 10080 has zero days for the global surgical package, so you
would charge for any additional services that were provided in
addition to the 10080 incision and drainage itself. The payer may
indicate that 10081 has 10 days for the global surgical package that
would include routine follow-up care and services (such as removal of
sutures) at no charge. You must know the number of days in the
global service for a code to correctly bill for the services that are not
included in the bundle and to be certain not to bill for services that
were included in the surgical package.
 
FIGURE 13–8
Surgery package.
 The Physician’s Fee Schedule
Relative Value Files are located on the CMS website at
www.cms.gov/PhysicianFeeSched/PFSRVF/list.asp
. It is within these
files that the global days for each surgical procedure is located.
One last coding guideline that you have to know before you begin
to code surgical procedures pertains to materials and supply codes.
When 
materials
 or 
supplies
 over and above those usually used in an
office visit have been used, you code and charge for these materials
and supplies in addition to charging for the office visit or procedure.
For example, when a physician does a wound repair during an office
visit and uses a surgical tray, the surgical tray may be identified by
CPT code 99070. Code 99070 is listed in the Medicine section, Special
Services, Procedures, and Reports subsection, Miscellaneous Services.
CMS RULES
HCPCS code A4550 also reports the use of a surgical tray. Third-party
payers who pay separately for a surgical tray usually want the
HCPCS “A” code to report the tray. Some third-party payers pay
separately for a surgical tray. Medicare does not pay separately for
specific kit trays.(Medicare Claims Processing Manual, 
Chapter 12
,
Section 20.4.4-Supplies, B3-15900.2
(
www.cms.gov/manuals/downloads/clm104c12.pdf
))
The following examples recap two major guidelines concerning
surgical packages:
1. 
Surgical packages for procedures usually include the preoperative
service, the procedure (intraoperative), related services, and routine
postoperative services. Payers vary in their interpretation of the global
surgical package. Although most follow the CPT guidelines, some
payers, such as Medicare, expand the services that are included in the
surgical package to include treatment of complications by the same
physician.
Example
An established patient, Mary Smith is referred to a surgeon for
excessive menstrual bleeding. The surgeon decides a hysterectomy is
necessary and schedules the surgical procedure for 2 weeks later. The
surgeon plans to recheck Mary in the office the day before surgery.
The initial visit, at which the decision is made to perform surgery, is
billable, but the preoperative visit on the day before surgery is
bundled into the surgical package, as is the procedure itself and any
routine follow-up.
2. 
Complications are usually added on a service-by-service basis.
CMS RULES
Medicare includes care for complications related to the primary
surgical procedure in the global reimbursement and does not
reimburse separately for the complications. If the complication
requires a return to the operating room, the procedure is separately
reported with modifier -78 (Unplanned return to the
operating/procedure room by the same physician following initial
procedure for a related procedure during the postoperative period)
and the initial surgery global period continues. Most private payers
follow the Medicare rules.
Even though the routine follow-up care is at no charge, the service
is still coded to indicate that the service was provided. CPT code
99024 (Postoperative follow-up visit, included in global service) alerts
the third-party payer that the services were rendered but the services
were included in a surgical package and not charged for.
 
From the Trenches
“We see the importance of networking and assisting each other as we seek
answers/solutions to complex coding scenarios.
 
.
 
.
 
. There are so many
complexities to coding where there are no easy answers as we seek to code
correctly and ethically.”
ROBERT
Example
A patient undergoes a wound repair that is coded 12014 (the third-
party payer indicated that there was a 10-day surgical package for
this code) and 5 days afterwards sees the physician for routine
follow-up care of the wound. The fee statement for the office visit at
which the routine follow-up care is provided would be:
99024
Postoperative follow-up visit
No charge
However, if the patient returned during the global period because
of a breakdown in the skin around the surgical wound (dehiscence)
but with no signs of infection, and the patient was returned to the
operating room at which time the physician trimmed the skin
margins around the wound and resutured the wound, you would
report and charge for this complication during the global period with:
12020-78
Dehiscence, simple closure
$xx.xx
If a patient undergoes the repair of a 7.9-cm wound that is coded
12004 (the third-party payer indicated that there was no surgical
package for this code) and sees the physician a few days later for
routine follow-up care, the service is coded and charged for.
12004
Wound repair, 7.9 cm
$xx.xx
99070
Surgical tray
$xx.xx
99212
Office visit
$xx.xx
CMS RULES
Medicare assigns 12004 a 0-day global period. Medicare does not
reimburse separately for supplies.
Inclusion or exclusion of a procedure in the CPT manual does not
imply any health insurance coverage or reimbursement policy.
Although the CPT manual includes guidelines on usage, third-party
payers may interpret and accept the use of CPT codes and the
guidelines in any manner they choose.
EXERCISE 13-2
Surgical Package
Answer the following:
1 
What are the three parts of a surgery bundled into a surgical
package?
a 
___________________________
b 
___________________________
c 
___________________________
2 
Is general anesthesia included in the surgical package?
_________________________________________
3 
Do all third-party payers follow the same reimbursement guidelines
for the global packages? ______________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
General subsection
The General subsection contains codes for fine needle aspirations
(10021, 10022), excluding bone marrow aspirations (see code 38220).
The codes are divided based on whether 
imaging guidance
 was used
during the aspiration. A 
fine needle aspiration
 is used to withdraw
fluid that contains individual cells, as illustrated in 
Fig. 13-9
. The
needle is inserted into the area being biopsied and moved several
times to take multiple samples without withdrawing the needle. The
aspirated fluid/cells are then examined by a pathologist using a
microscope (88172, 88173, or 88177). This type of biopsy is not to be
confused with a needle core biopsy, such as that identified by 19100,
percutaneous breast biopsy using a 
needle core,
 in which a core of
suspicious tissue is removed for examination, or the biopsy
represented in 19101, breast biopsy using an open incision, which
reports a procedure in which the biopsy site is exposed to the
surgeon’s view and a sample of the lesion is removed. Notes
following codes 10021-10022 indicate several other codes that are used
to report percutaneous needle biopsies based on what was biopsied.
EXERCISE 13-3
General Subsection
Using the CPT manual, report the services for the following:
1 
The physician palpates a cyst on the right breast and performs a fine
needle aspiration in the office.
Code: ___________________
2 
A patient presents to the outpatient surgical center at the clinic for a
fine needle aspiration of the thyroid. Ultrasound guidance is
utilized during the aspiration.
Code aspiration: ___________________
Code ultrasound guidance: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
FIGURE 13–9
Fine needle biopsy.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 13, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 Most surgery subsections are defined according to body system or
______________________ _______________________.
2 Notes in the CPT manual may appear before subsections,
subheadings, categories, and ____________________________.
3 Unlisted codes identify procedures or services throughout the
Surgery section that indicate what? ____________________
4 Pertinent information in a special report should include an adequate
______ or _______ of the nature, extent, and need for the procedure.
5 The term “separate procedure” is an indication of how, or if, the
code should be __________________________________.
6 General anesthesia services are reported separately by what type of
provider? ____________________________________
7 Surgery: “General subsection” codes are divided based on what
criteria? ________________________________________
Chapter 13, part I, theory
Now is an excellent time to put all your newly learned coding skills to work
by completing a Chapter Review.
1 What is the largest section of the six CPT manual sections?
_____________________________
2 Does Medicare reimburse for every surgical tray?
Yes No
3 The subsections in the Surgery section are usually divided according
to _________________________________ specialty,
__________________________________________ system, or
___________________________________________ site.
4 These are found at the beginning of each section and contain
information specific to the section:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
5 This symbol indicates new or revised text within the current edition
of the CPT manual:
a x
b 
▶
 
◂
c 
⨀
d +
6 Information within parentheses is referred to as ____________
expression or phrase.
7 Before assigning this type of code, you must be certain that a more
specific Category I or a Category III code is not available:
______________
8 This report contains the nature, extent, need, time, effort, and (at
times) the equipment necessary to provide a service:
_____________________________
9 This designation within the CPT manual indicates a procedure that
is only reported when it is performed as the only procedure or when
another procedure performed at the same time is unrelated to this
procedure. This is a ________________ procedure.
10 When time, effort, and services are bundled together, they form
a(n) ____________ package.
11 ____________ anesthesia is defined as local infiltration,
metacarpal/digital block, or topical anesthesia.
12 According to Medicare guidelines, ____________ complications of a
surgical procedure are usually included in the reimbursement for a
major surgical procedure.
13 Code ____________________ is a CPT code that can be assigned to
report a surgical tray.
14 Code ____________________ is a HCPCS code that can be assigned
to report a surgical tray.
15 This code reports a postoperative follow-up visit that is included in
the global service: ____________________
Chapter 13, part II, practical
With the use of the CPT manual index, answer the following:
16 ____________ destruction is a part of a surgical procedure, and
different methods of destruction are not ordinarily listed separately.
17 Care of the condition for which a diagnostic procedure was
performed or of other _________________ conditions is not included
and may be listed separately.
18 There are “Notes” in the Burns, ____________ Treatment category.
19 The only code in the Operating Microscope subsection is
____________________.
20 Follow-up care for therapeutic surgical procedures includes only
that care which is usually part of the ________________ (two words).
According to the parenthetical information that follows code 10022:
21 The four codes for radiological supervision and interpretation are
____________________, ____________________,
____________________, and ____________________.
22 For evaluation of fine needle aspirate, see _____________,
____________, _____________.
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 14
Integumentary system
 
“Get to know what your doctors are doing—how they do procedures
and how they document. . . . You can get all the codes correct up
front. It sets the stage for anything you have to do with the insurance
companies later.”
Christopher P. Galeziewski, CPC
Coding Compliance Specialist
 
Coding Compliance Department
 
Kelsey-Seybold Clinic
 
Houston, Texas
CHAPTER TOPICS
Integumentary System
Format
Skin, Subcutaneous, and Accessory Structures
Nails, Pilonidal Cyst and Introduction
Repair (Closure)
Burns
Destruction
Breast Procedures
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Describe the format of the Integumentary System in the CPT
manual.
2 
Identify the elements of coding Skin, Subcutaneous, and Accessory
Structures services.
3 
Review the main services in Nails, Pilonidal Cyst and Introduction.
4 
Identify the major factors in Repair.
5 
State the important coding considerations in destruction and breast
procedures.
6 
Demonstrate the ability to code integumentary services and
procedures.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Integumentary system
The Integumentary System subsection includes codes assigned by
many different physician specialties. There is no restriction on who
reports the codes from this or any other subsection. You may find a
family practitioner using the incision and drainage, debridement, or
repair codes; a dermatologist using excision and destruction codes; a
plastic surgeon using skin graft codes; or a surgeon using breast
procedure codes.
You will learn about the Integumentary System subsection by first
reviewing the subsection format and then learning about coding the
services and procedures in the subsection.
 
QUICK CHECK 14-1
1. 
Dermatologists are the only providers who utilize the codes in the
Integumentary System subsection of the CPT manual.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Format
The subsection is formatted on the basis of anatomic site and category
of procedure. For example, an anatomic site is “Neck” and a category
of procedure is “Repair.”
The subsection Integumentary contains the subheadings:
■
 
Skin, Subcutaneous, and Accessory Structures
■
 
Nails
■
 
Pilonidal Cyst
■
 
Introduction
■
 
Repair (Closure)
■
 
Destruction
■
 
Breast
Each subheading is further divided by category. For example, the
subheading Skin, Subcutaneous, and Accessory Structures is divided
into the following categories:
■
 
Introduction and Removal
■
 
Incision and Drainage
■
 
Debridement
■
 
Paring or Cutting
■
 
Biopsy
■
 
Removal of Skin Tags
■
 
Shaving of Epidermal or Dermal Lesions
■
 
Excision—Benign Lesions
■
 
Excision—Malignant Lesions
 
From the Trenches
“[Documentation] comes down to semantics. Certain words mean certain
things.
 
.
 
.
 
. That’s what insurance companies look for to describe what type of
test or work effort was done to determine the patient’s illness.”
CHRIS
Skin, subcutaneous, and accessory
structures
Introduction and removal (10030-10036)
Code 10030 is assigned to report percutaneous image-guided fluid
drainage of a collection, such as an abscess, seroma, cyst, hematoma,
or lymphocele, from soft tissue. The collection is by means of a
catheter and reported once for each individual collection drained.
Image guidance is included and not reported separately. Codes 10035
and 10036 report the placement of soft tissue markers with imaging
guidance. The first lesion is reported with 10035, additional lesions are
reported with add-on code 10036.
Incision and drainage
Incision and Drainage (I&D) codes (10040-10180) are divided
according to the condition for which the I&D is being performed.
Acne surgery, abscess, carbuncle, boil, cyst, hematoma, and wound
infection are just some of the conditions for which a physician uses
I&D (
Fig. 14-1
). The physician opens the lesion to allow drainage. Also
included under this heading is a 
puncture aspiration
 code (10160),
which describes inserting a needle into a lesion and withdrawing the
fluid (aspiration). Whichever method is used—incision or aspiration—
the contents of the lesion are drained. Packing material may be
inserted into the opening or the wound may be left to drain freely. A
tube or strip of gauze, which acts as a wick, may be inserted into the
wound to facilitate drainage.
 
FIGURE 14–1
Massive staphylococcal carbuncle.
The I&D codes are first divided according to the condition and then
according to whether the procedure was simple/single or
complicated/multiple. The medical record would indicate the
condition and complexity of the I&D. Verify the body area where the
incision and drainage was performed for any specific CPT code that
could be assigned outside of the range 10040-10180. For example, a
simple and complicated finger abscess would be reported with an
incision and drainage code (26010, 26011) from the Musculoskeletal
System subsection, Hand and Finger, Incision codes. When you
reference the index of the CPT manual, under the main term
“Abscess” and subterm “Finger,” you are directed to the
Musculoskeletal System codes. Those codes are the most specific
codes to report the incision and drainage of a finger abscess and you
are to always assign the most specific code you can locate. Note that in
the index of the CPT manual again under the main term “Abscess”
and subterm “Skin,” you are directed to the Integumentary codes. You
should always reference the specific location of the abscess to receive
direction to the most correct code(s) and only reference the skin
subterm when there is no more specific location provided.
Debridement
Debridement is the removal of infected, contaminated, damaged,
devitalized, necrotic, or foreign tissue from a wound. Debridement
promotes wound healing by reducing sources of infection and other
mechanical impediments to healing. The goal of debridement is to
cleanse the wound, reduce bacterial contamination, and provide an
optimal environment for wound healing or possible surgical
intervention. The usual end point of debridement is removal of
pathological tissue and/or foreign material until healthy tissue is
exposed. Debridement techniques include, among others, sharp and
blunt dissection, curettement, scrubbing, and forceful irrigation.
Surgical instruments may include a scrub brush, irrigation device,
electrocautery, laser, sharp curette, forceps, scissors, burr, or scalpel.
Prior to debridement, determination of the extent of an ulcer/wound
may be aided by the use of probes to determine the depth and to
disclose abscess and sinus tracts.
These debridement codes do not apply to debridement of burned
surfaces. For debridement of burned surfaces, CPT codes 16000-16036
are reported.
Excision—debridement
Codes in this category (11000-11047) describe services of debridement
based on depth, body surface, condition, and for 11004-11006 by
location. The first debridement codes (11000 and 11001) are reported
for eczematous debridement. 
Eczema
 is a skin condition that blisters
and weeps, as illustrated in 
Fig. 14-2
.
 
FIGURE 14–2
Eczematous dermatitis.
The dead tissue may have to be cut away with a scalpel or scissors
or, in less severe cases, washed with a saline solution. Code 11000
reports debridement of 10% of the body surface or less, and add-on
code 11001 reports each additional 10% or part thereof.
Codes 11042-11047 are based on the depth of tissue removed and
surface area of the wound. When reporting one wound, report the
depth of the deepest level of tissue removed. When reporting multiple
wounds, sum the surface area of the wound at the same depth. Do not
combine sums of different depths.
Some codes in this category are based on the extent of the
debridement of the skin, subcutaneous tissue, muscle fascia, muscle,
or bone.
 
CODING SHOT
Some surgical procedure codes include debridement as a part of the
service. You may report a debridement as a separate service when the
medical record indicates that a greater than usual debridement was
provided. For example, if an extensive debridement of an open
fracture was performed when usually a simple debridement would
be performed, you report the additional service using a debridement
code from the 11010-11012 range.
CMS RULES
According to Medicare LCD for Debridement Services L27373,
09/30/2015, the following is considered when reporting debridement:
1. 
CPT codes 11000 and 11001 describe removal of extensive
eczematous or infected skin. A key word is extensive. Conditions
that may require debridement of large amounts of skin include:
rapidly spreading necrotizing process (sometimes seen with
aggressive streptococcal infections), severe eczema, bullous skin
diseases, extensive skin trauma (including large abraded areas with
ground-in dirt), or autoimmune skin diseases (such as pemphigus).
2. 
If there is no necrotic, devitalized, fibrotic, or other tissue or foreign
matter present that would interfere with wound healing, the
debridement service is not medically necessary. The presence or
absence of such tissue or foreign matter must be documented in the
medical record.
3. 
The following procedures are considered part of active wound care
management, and are not considered as debridement and are not
included in this LCD: Removal of devitalized tissue from wound(s),
non-selective debridement, without anesthesia (e.g., wet-to-moist
dressings, enzymatic, abrasion), including topical application(s),
wound assessment, and instruction(s) for ongoing care.
4. 
CPT code 11001 is limited to those practitioners who are licensed to
perform surgery above the ankle, since the amount of skin required
by the code is more than that contained on both feet.
5. 
Removing a collar of callus (hyperkeratotic tissue) around an ulcer
is not debridement of skin or necrotic tissue and should not be
billed as such. The service should be billed under CPT code 11055 or
11056. Please refer to NGS LCD Routine Foot Care and
Debridement of Nails (L26426) for information regarding these CPT
codes. This LCD does not apply to debridement services performed
by physical or occupational therapists. For debridement services
performed by physical or occupational therapists, please use CPT
codes 97597, 97598 and 97602. Providers should refer to NGS LCD
for Outpatient Physical and Occupational Services (L26884).
6. 
Local infiltration, metacarpal/digital block or topical anesthesia are
included in the reimbursement for debridement services and are not
separately payable. Anesthesia administered by or incident to the
provider performing the debridement procedure is not separately
payable.
7. 
Photographic documentation of wounds either immediately before
or immediately after debridement is recommended for prolonged or
repetitive debridement services (especially those that exceed five
extensive debridements per wound (CPT code 11043 and/or 11044)).
If the provider is unable to use photographs for documentation
purposes, the medical record should contain sufficient detail to
determine the extent of the wound and the result of the treatment.
8. 
Debridement services are now defined by body surface area of the
debrided tissue and not by individual ulcers or wounds. For
example, debridement of two ulcers on the foot to the level of
subcutaneous tissue, total area of 6 sq cm should be billed as CPT
code 11042 with unit of service of “1”.
Introduction to lesions
Before you learn about coding the various methods of lesion
destruction and excision, you need to review a few rules that apply
broadly to this commonly performed procedure. After you have
learned the general lesion information, you will review each of the
destruction and excision methods.
Lesion excision and destruction. 
There are many types of lesions of the skin (
Fig. 14-3
) and many types
of treatment for lesions. Types of treatment include 
paring
 (peeling or
scraping), 
shaving
 (slicing), 
excision
 (cutting removal), and
destruction
 (ablation). To code these procedures properly, you must
know the 
site, number,
 and 
size
 of the excised lesion(s), as well as
whether the lesion is malignant or benign.
FIGURE 14–3
Lesions of the skin.
Prior to excision, the greatest diameter of the lesion is measured.
The measurement includes the margin (extra tissue taken from around
the lesion) at its narrowest part. 
Fig. 14-4
 illustrates calculations of a
2.0 cm lesion. The size of the margin necessary to completely remove
the lesion is based on the physician’s judgment. The pathology report
is used to identify the size of the lesion only if no other record of the
size can be documented because the solution the lesion is stored in
shrinks the lesion.
 
FIGURE 14–4
Calculations of a 2.0 cm lesion.
All lesions excised will have a pathology report for diagnosing the
removed tissue as malignant or benign; since the codes are divided
based on whether the excised lesion is malignant or benign, the billing
for the excision is not submitted to the third-party payer until the
pathology report has been completed.
 
CAUTION 
Destruction of lesions destroys the lesion, leaving no available tissue for
biopsy; therefore, there will be no pathology report for lesions that have been
destroyed by laser, chemicals, electrocautery, or other methods. In these
cases, unless a biopsy was performed prior to destruction, you will have to
take the type of lesion from the physician’s notes only, as there is no
pathology report.
Codes in the Integumentary System subsection differ greatly in
their descriptions. Some codes indicate only one lesion per code,
others are for the second and third lesions only, and still others
indicate a certain number of lesions (e.g., up to 15 lesions). When
reporting multiple lesions, you must read the description carefully to
prevent incorrect coding.
If multiple lesions are treated, code the 
most complex lesion
procedure first followed by the others using modifier -51
 to indicate
that multiple procedures were performed. Remember that the third-
party payer will usually reduce the payment for the services identified
with modifier -51; so you want to be certain that you place the service
with the highest dollar amount first, without the modifier. If the code
description includes multiple lesions (a stated number of lesions),
modifier -51 is not necessary. For example, if the code states “2 to 4
lesions” or “more than 4 lesions,” modifier -51 is not required.
Closure of excision sites. 
Included in the codes for lesion excision is the direct, primary, or
simple closure of the operative site. 
Excision
 is defined as a full
thickness (through the dermis) excision of a lesion and a 
simple
closure
 is nonlayered closure (
Fig. 14-5
).
 
 
FIGURE 14–5
A
 and 
B,
 Simple closure.
 Source: (
B
 courtesy Mary Garden.)
Closures can also be 
intermediate
 (layered; 
Fig. 14-6
) or 
complex
(greater than layered). The local anesthesia is included in the excision
codes. Any closure other than a simple closure can be reported
separately with lesion excision.
 
 
 
FIGURE 14–6
Intermediate two-layer closure.
Three final notes on treatment of lesions:
1. 
The shaving of lesions requires no closure because no incision has
been made.
2. 
Excision includes simple closure but may require more complex
closure. If more complex closure is required, follow the notes in the
CPT manual to appropriately code for these services.
3. 
Destruction may be by any method, including freezing, burning,
chemicals, etc.
Paring or cutting
Paring or Cutting codes (11055-11057) report the services when a
physician removes a benign hyperkeratotic skin lesion such as a callus
or corn (
Fig. 14-7
). Paring codes include removal by peeling or
scraping. A small ring-shaped instrument (curette), blade, or similar
sharp instrument is used for paring. Bleeding is usually controlled by
a chemical that is applied to the surface after removal of the lesion.
The codes are divided based on the number of lesions removed.
 
FIGURE 14–7
Corns (clavi) on the plantar surface.
Biopsy
“Biopsy” is a term applied to the procedure of removing tissue for
histopathology (study of microscopic tissue changes). Removing a
tissue sample of a lesion may be by needle aspiration (needle inserted
for sampling of cells), incisional biopsy (open, sharp, and partial
removal), or by excisional biopsy (complete removal). You would not
report 
both
 a biopsy and an excision performed at the same time as
the biopsy is bundled into the excision service. For CPT lesion biopsy
codes, only a portion of the lesion and some of the surrounding tissue
is removed. The section of surrounding tissue (margin) is included so
the pathologist can compare the normal tissue to the lesion tissue and
note the differences.
 
CODING SHOT
Included in the Biopsy codes are codes for biopsies of mucous
membranes. A mucous membrane is tissue that covers a variety of
body parts, such as the tongue and the nasal cavities.
Many methods are used to obtain biopsies; the method chosen is
determined by the size and type of the lesion and the physician’s
preference. Common biopsy methods are scraping, cutting, and the
punch. A punch biopsy is illustrated in 
Fig. 14-8
 and is used to excise
a disc of tissue. A punch can also be used in the excision of the entire
lesion, so just because the medical record refers to the use of a punch,
it does not mean that a biopsy was performed.
 
FIGURE 14–8
Punch biopsy.
Biopsy sites do not necessarily have to be closed; some are so small
that they will close readily. Other sites are large enough that closure is
required, and simple closure is bundled into the biopsy codes. If
closure of the biopsy site is more than a simple closure, you would
report the more extensive closure separately. You will learn more
about closure later in this chapter.
On the paper CMS-1500 claim form, you would report the number
of lesions treated in column 24G., Days or Units, as illustrated in 
Fig.
14-9
.
 
CAUTION 
Do not assign modifier -51 with these biopsy codes, as 11100 reports a single
lesion, and 11101 is an add-on code for each additional lesion. The correct
coding for three lesions would be 11100 for lesion one and 11101 × 2 for
lesions two and three.
 
FIGURE 14–9
Units column (G) of the CMS-1500.
Skin tags
Skin tags are flaps of skin (benign lesions) that can appear anywhere,
but most often appear on the neck or trunk, especially in older people
(
Fig. 14-10
, 
A
). Skin tags are removed in a variety of ways—scissors,
blades, ligatures, electrosurgery, or chemicals. 
Scissors removal
 of a
skin tag is illustrated in 
Fig. 14-10
, 
B.
 Scissoring is often used for tissue
column lesions. The forceps grasps the column, and the physician
snips the lesion off at its base. Closure is achieved by using sutures or
an aluminum chloride solution. In 
ligature strangulation
, a thread is
tied at the base of the lesion and left there until the tissue dies. The
lesion then drops off. Whatever method of removal is used, simple
closure is included in the skin tag codes, as is any local anesthesia that
is used. Also, note that the codes (11200, 11201) are based on the first
15 lesions and then on each additional 10 lesions (or part thereof) after
the first 15. On the CMS-1500 claim form, report the number of lesions
treated in 24G., Days or Units (see 
Fig. 14-9
).
CODING SHOT
 
Do not use modifier -51 (multiple procedure) with skin tag codes, as
the codes are based on the number of lesions removed.
 
 
FIGURE 14–10
A,
 Skin tag. 
B,
 Scissors removal.
Shaving of epidermal or dermal lesions
The 
shaving
 of a lesion (11300-11313) can be performed by using a
scalpel blade or other sharp instrument. The shaving of a lesion is
illustrated in 
Fig. 14-11
.
 
FIGURE 14–11
Shaving of a lesion.
The blade is held horizontal to the skin and an epidermal or dermal
lesion is sliced off. Anesthesia and cauterization (electrocautery or
chemical cautery) to control bleeding are included in the lesion-
shaving codes.
Electrocautery is sometimes used to finish the edges of the shaving,
but if electrocautery is the main method by which the lesion was
removed, you would assign codes from the Destruction, Benign or
Premalignant Lesions category (17000-17250), not from the Shaving
category. Electrosurgery used in shaving a superficial lesion burns
(destroys) the lesion, so the destruction code would be reported.
The Shaving codes are further defined according to the 
location
 of
the lesion—trunk, neck, nose—and the size of the lesion. If more than
one lesion was removed, you would add modifier -51 (multiple
procedures) to any codes after the first code. For example, if one 2.0-
cm lesion was removed from the trunk, and a 1.0-cm lesion was
removed from the hand, you would list the 2.0-cm lesion first with no
modifier and the 1.0-cm lesion second, with modifier -51 added. Many
third-party payers reimburse 100% for the first lesion and 50% for the
second lesion, so by placing the more intensive procedure first, you
optimize reimbursement.
Excision—benign lesions
The CPT manual divides the category of excision of lesions on the
basis of whether a lesion is benign or malignant. Although at the time
of excision it is not known for certain whether the lesion is benign
(non-cancerous) or malignant (cancerous), the physician makes an
assessment of the lesion’s status and usually plans the extent of the
excision based on that assessment. The codes in the Excision—Benign
Lesions category (11400-11471) are assigned for all benign lesions
except skin tags, which you learned about earlier.
The codes include local anesthesia, so do not report local anesthesia
separately, as that would be unbundling. The Excision codes also
include simple closure (see 
Fig. 14-5
) of the excision site. If the closure
is noted in the medical record as being more than simple
(intermediate or complex), you would code the more complicated
closure using a separate code from Repair subheading (12031-13160).
 
CODING SHOT
You are not to assign the shaving codes if the shaving penetrated
through the dermis (full thickness). Full-thickness shavings are to be
reported with the excision codes found in the Excision—Benign
Lesions or Excision—Malignant Lesions categories.
The codes in the Excision—Benign Lesions category are based on
the 
location
 of the excision (e.g., trunk, scalp, ears, etc.) and the 
size
 of
the lesion (e.g., 0.6-1.0 cm, 1.1-2.0 cm).
 
CODING SHOT
In excision of either benign or malignant tissue, focus on the
dimension of the normal tissue margin excised with the lesion. This
normal tissue margin is the determining factor in selecting the correct
CPT code.
There are several codes at the end of the category (11450-11471) for
excision of the skin and subcutaneous tissue in cases of 
hidradenitis
(
Fig. 14-12
), which is the chronic abscessing and subsequent infection
of a sweat gland. The abscess is excised and the wound left open to
heal. The hidradenitis codes are based on the abscess location
(axillary, inguinal, perianal, perineal, or umbilical) and the complexity
of the repair (simple, intermediate, or complex).
 
FIGURE 14–12
A hallmark of hidradenitis is the double and triple
comedone, a blackhead with two or sometimes several surface
openings that communicate under the skin.
Excision—malignant lesions
Codes in the Excision—Malignant Lesions subheading (11600-11646)
are assigned for malignant lesions and include local anesthesia and
simple closure (
Fig. 14-13
). As with the benign lesion codes, these
codes refer to each lesion removed and are divided according to the
location
 and 
size
 of the lesion. If you are coding a lesion removal that
has been performed by a method other than excision (e.g.,
electrosurgery), the notes preceding the Excision codes direct you to
the Destruction codes (17260-17286). If the closure is more than simple
you would also use a repair code.
CODING SHOT
 
If the excision is of a malignant lesion on the eyelid, and if the
excision involves more than the skin of the eyelid (lid margin, tarsus,
or conjunctiva), do 
not
 use codes from the Integumentary System
chapter of CPT. Instead, you would use a surgery code from the
subsection Eye and Ocular Adnexa, Excision category (67800-67850).
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 14–13
Excision biopsy technique.
 
From the Trenches
Would you recommend coding as a profession?
“I would for people who are meticulous and have a mind for detail.
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
People
who take pride in their work. Someone who will say, ‘I can find things out. I
can learn things, and I can make it worthwhile for the physician to employ
me.’“
CHRIS
Nails
Within the Nails category (11719-11765) are codes for the trimming of
fingernails and toenails, debridement of nails, removal of nails,
drainage of hematomas, biopsies of nails, repair of nails,
reconstruction of the nail bed. 
Podiatrists
 are physicians who
specialize in the care of the foot; as such, these physicians use this
category of codes extensively. However, all physicians can and do use
these codes when providing nail care services to the feet and the
hands.
The first code in the Nails category is 11719, which reports the
trimming of nails that are not defective. This is a minimal service, and
the code reports trimming one fingernail/toenail or many
fingernails/toenails. 
Debridement
 (11720) is a more complex service—
the manual cleaning of up to five nails—and it includes the use of
various tools, cleaning materials/solutions, and files. You would not
report the supplies used for a nail debridement service separately, as
these supplies are included in the codes. The two debridement codes
are divided according to the number of nails attended to during the
service. If the payer requires HCPCS codes, report G0127.
TOOLBOX 14-1
 
Mary presents to the physician for cleaning and trimming of 10
toenails. Mary is handicapped and lives alone and has not had
anyone to help her with care of her toenails.
Questions
1.
 Which of the following correctly reports the service provided to
Mary?
a. 
11720 × 10
b. 
11719 × 10
c. 
11732
d. 
11719
2.
 Why are you certain this is the correct answer? ________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Avulsion
 is the separation and removal of the nail plate (11730,
11732), preserving the root so the nail will grow back. An anesthetic is
administered, the nail is lifted away from the nail bed, and a portion
or all of the nail plate is removed.
Place the number of nails treated in the units column (G) of the
CMS-1500 form.
 
CODING SHOT
Do not use modifier -51 (multiple procedures) with nail removal
codes, as there are two codes available: one for a single nail and one
for each additional nail. For example, if three nails were removed,
you would report: 11730 (for the first nail) and 11732 × 2 (for the
second and third nails). Often, third-party payers require the use of
HCPCS modifiers (F1-FA to indicate the finger and T1-TA to indicate
the toe; 
Fig. 14-14
) and the separate reporting of each digit treated.
 
FIGURE 14–14
HCPCS modifiers used to indicate digits of hands and
feet.
A subungual hematoma (blood trapped under the nail) is evacuated
by puncturing the nail with an electrocautery needle (11740). The
trapped blood and fluid are drained by applying pressure to the top
of the nail.
Onychocryptosis (ingrown toenail) is the most common condition
of the great toe, as illustrated in 
Fig. 14-15
. The nail grows down and
into the soft tissue of the nail fold, causing extreme pain and often
infection. Treatment for severe cases is a partial onychectomy
(removal of the nail plate and root). The toe is anesthetized and a
portion of the nail plate and root is removed (11750). The nail will not
grow back where the base has been removed.
 
CODING SHOT
Use of HCPCS modifiers is very important. For example, nail biopsies
(11755) were performed on the left third finger (F2) and the left fourth
finger (F3), in addition to the right fourth digit (F8). The reporting
would be 11755-F2, 11755-F3, 11755-F8.
 
FIGURE 14–15
Removal of ingrown toenail.
Pilonidal cyst
The codes for the excision of a pilonidal cyst or sinus are 11770-11772.
A pilonidal cyst is located in the sacral area and is most often caused
by an ingrown hair. The codes are divided according to the
complexity of the excision—simple, extensive, or complicated. For a
simple cyst, the physician would excise the cyst and suture the skin
together. A cyst larger than 2 cm is considered complicated and
requires more extensive excision and closure. A complicated excision
is very extensive and usually requires reconstructive surgical repair.
Introduction
Within the Introduction category of codes (11900-11983) are lesion
injection, tattooing, tissue expansion, contraceptive capsule
insertion/removal, and hormone implantation services. Lesions are
injected with medication to treat conditions such as acne, keloids (scar
tissue), and psoriasis (autoimmune disorder that results in scaly
patches). Lesion injection codes are divided according to the number
of lesions injected (1-7 or 8+).
 
CODING SHOT
Lesion injection code 11901 is not an add-on code! You report 11900
for lesion injections numbering one through seven, and 11901 to
report injections eight and more. For example, if seven lesions are
injected, the service is reported with 11900. If eight lesions are
injected, the service is reported with 11901.
Tattooing
 codes (11920-11922) are also located in the Introduction
category. Tattooing is reported on the basis of square centimeters
covered. Sometimes physicians use tattooing to disguise birthmarks or
scars.
Codes for subcutaneous injection of filling material (11950-11954)
are located in the Introduction category and are reported for services
such as collagen or silicone injections (injectable dermal implants)
used as a wrinkle treatment. The codes are based on the amount of
material injected. The procedure is usually repeated at 2 to 3 week
intervals until the results are those desired.
Tissue-expander
 codes (11960-11971) are also located in the
Introduction category and report tissue expanders. A tissue expander
is an elastic material formed into a sac that is then filled with fluid or
air so it expands like a balloon. The expander is placed under the skin
and is filled, stretching the skin. Expanders are most often used to
prepare a site for a permanent implant. Expanders are also used to
assist in the repair of scars and the removal of tattoos by stretching the
skin, removing the expander, removing the scar or tattoo, and
suturing the skin edges together. The codes are divided according to
whether the service is an insertion, a removal, or an expander removal
with replacement of a prosthesis.
 
CODING SHOT
Do not report an expander code from the Introduction category after
a mastectomy in which a temporary expander has been inserted.
Code 19357 from the reconstruction section of the Integumentary
subsection is a combination of the mastectomy and insertion of an
expander. If at a later date the expander was replaced with a
permanent prosthesis, you would report replacement of tissue
expander with permanent prosthesis with 19342.
You will also find insertion of 
implantable contraceptive capsules
in the Introduction category. Implantable contraceptive capsules are
inserted under the skin by means of a small incision on the upper arm.
A capsule is effective for a number of years; at the end of that time, it
must be removed. Read the descriptions in the implantable
contraceptive capsule codes (11976-11981) carefully, as there are codes
for insertion and removal.
In addition to reporting the service of the introduction of the
implantable contraceptive capsule, you report the supply of the
contraceptive system with HCPCS code J7306 or J7307.
Subcutaneous hormone pellet implantation
 is commonly used for
the insertion of a hormone in a time-release capsule into the buttocks
of women requiring hormone replacement therapy after menopause.
The code for this implantation is in the Introduction category (11980).
The implantation area is anesthetized and the pellet is inserted
through a tube. The pellet is completely absorbed into the system and
does not need to be removed, as does a contraceptive capsule.
However, a new pellet must be inserted every 6 to 9 months, and each
reinsertion is reported separately.
EXERCISE 14-1
Skin, Subcutaneous, and Accessory
Structures
Apply the information about lesion procedures by coding the
following:
1 
Paring of three common warts
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Removal of 15 skin tags
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Shaving of 1-cm dermal lesion of face
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Repair (closure)
Repair factors
When reporting integumentary wound repair, the following three
factors must be considered:
1. 
Length of the wound in centimeters
2. 
Complexity of the repair
3. 
Site of the wound repair
Remember 
length, complexity,
 and 
site.
 
Fig. 14-16
 illustrates an
example from the CPT manual of these three factors in the wound
repair codes.
 
FIGURE 14–16
Wound repair. Note that metric measure is used
throughout the CPT manual.
There are many different types of wounds (
Fig. 14-17
). Wound
repair is classified by the type of repair necessary to repair the wound.
There are three types of repair:
1. 
Simple:
 Superficial wound repair (12001-12021) that involves
epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue (
Fig. 14-18
) and requires
only simple, one-layer suturing. If the simple wound repair is
accomplished with tape or adhesive strips, the charge for the closure
is included in the E/M service code and would not be reported
separately with a repair code. The repair codes are for suture closure.
2. 
Intermediate:
 Requires closure of one or more layers of
subcutaneous tissue and superficial (non-muscle) fascia, in addition to
the skin closure. You can report intermediate closure (12031-12057)
when the wound has to be extensively cleaned, even if the closure was
a single-layer (simple) closure.
3. 
Complex:
 Involves complicated wound closure including revision,
debridement, extensive undermining, stents or retention sutures, and
more than layered closure (13100-13160).
 
From the Trenches
“[It’s my job] to make sure physicians are saying [everything] into their
microrecorder, or writing it down. You would be surprised how many
physicians [diagnose a patient] mentally, as an automatic thing as part of
their evaluation of the patient’s condition—then they do the medical decision
making on how to treat the patient. Sometimes a third of it doesn’t even get
put down, and the coder can only count that third of information, until it’s
in the record.... I’ve told doctors ‘You dictated this, and this is all you’re
going to get’ so they can see the consequences.”
CHRIS




FIGURE 14–17
Types of wounds. 
A
 and 
B,
 Laceration. 
C
 and 
D,
Puncture. 
E
 and 
F,
 Abrasion. 
G
 and 
H,
 Avulsion. 
I,
 Incision.
 
FIGURE 14–18
Skin cross-section.
 
CODING SHOT
HCPCS code 
G0168
 reports skin closures using adhesives (such as
Dermabond, a special glue that is put into the wound, the edges are
closed together; a bandage is placed over the wound). Most other
third-party payers use the simple repair code to report skin closures
using adhesives. Medicare requires G0168.
For each anatomic site, the lengths of wounds are totaled together
by complexity (simple, intermediate, complex). All the simple wounds
of the same site grouping are reported together; all the intermediate
wounds of the same site grouping are reported together; and all the
complex wounds of the same site grouping are reported together. The
codes group together sites that require similar techniques to repair.
For example, 12001 groups superficial scalp, neck, axillae, external
genitalia, trunk, and extremities (including hands and feet). When
there is more than one repair type, the 
most complex
 type is listed as
the first (primary) procedure. The secondary procedure is then
reported using modifier -59 (distinct procedural service).
 
CAUTION 
For repairs:
• 
Group together the same anatomic
 
sites,
 
such as face and hand.
• 
Group together the same
 
classification,
 
such as simple or intermediate.
The CPT manual notes located under the subheading Repair
(Closure) include extensive definitions of each level of repair. These
notes must be read carefully before you code repairs.
Repair component
Three things are considered components (parts) of integumentary
wound repair:
1. 
Simple 
ligation
 (tying) of small vessels is considered part of the
wound repair and is not reported separately. Simple ligation of
medium or major arteries in a wound is, however, reported
separately.
2. 
Simple 
exploration
 of surrounding tissue, nerves, vessels, and
tendons is considered part of the wound repair process and is not
listed separately.
3. 
Normal 
debridement
 (cleaning and removing skin or tissue from
the wound until normal, healthy tissue is exposed) is not listed
separately.
If the wound is grossly contaminated and requires extensive
debridement, a separate debridement procedure may be assigned
(11000-11047 for extensive debridement). 
Fig. 14-19
 illustrates a
surgical type of debridement.
 
FIGURE 14–19
Surgical debridement for the removal of periwound
nonmigratory tissue using a pair of scissors and forceps.
Tissue transfers, grafts, and flaps
There are many types of grafting procedures that can be performed to
correct a defect (e.g., adjacent tissue transfers or rearrangements, skin
replacement surgery and skin substitutes, flaps). To understand skin
grafting, you must know that the 
recipient site
 is the area of defect
that receives the graft, and the 
donor site
 is the area from which the
healthy skin has been taken for grafting. (If a skin graft is required to
close the donor site, the closure is reported as an additional
procedure.) A brief description follows of some different types of skin
grafting and coding guidelines specific to their assignment.
Adjacent tissue transfer or rearrangement. 
There are many types of adjacent tissue transfers (14000-14350). Some
of them are Z-plasty (
Fig. 14-20
), W-plasty, V-Y plasty, rotation flaps
(
Fig. 14-21
), and advancement flaps. These procedures are various
methods of moving a segment of skin from one area to an adjacent
area, while leaving at least one side of the flap (moved skin) intact to
retain some measure of blood supply to the graft. Incisions are made,
and the skin is undermined and moved over to cover the defective
area, leaving the base (connected portion) intact. The flap is then
sutured into place.
 
FIGURE 14–20
Z-plasty is named for the shape of the incision.
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 14–21
A,
 Sacral ulcer. 
B,
 Closure by a large rotation flap
based superiorly. 
C
 and 
D,
 Outline of flap and rotation downward and
medially.
Adjacent tissue transfers are reported according to the size of the
recipient site.
 The size is measured in square centimeters (1 inch
equals 2.54 cm). Simple repair of the donor site is included in the
tissue transfer code and is not reported separately. If there is a
complex closure, or grafting of the donor site, this could be reported
separately. Adjacent Tissue Transfer or Rearrangement (14000-14350)
in the CPT manual is divided based on the 
location
 of the defect
(trunk or arm) and the 
size
 of the defect. In addition, there are codes
at the end of the category for coding defects that are extremely
complicated. When skin grafting is required to cover both the primary
defect (results from the excision) and the secondary defect (results
from the flap design), the measurements of each defect are added
together to determine the code selection for the graft.
Any excision of a lesion that is repaired by adjacent tissue transfer is
included in the tissue transfer code. If you reported the excision in
addition to the transfer, it would be considered unbundling.
Adjacent tissue transfer codes can be located in the CPT manual
index under the main term “Skin” and subterm “Adjacent Tissue
Transfer.”
Skin replacement surgery (15002-15278). 
These codes report surgical site preparation (15002-15261) using a
variety of grafting materials and repair methods using skin or skin
substitutes. The site of the defect (recipient site) may require surgical
preparation before repair, and is reported with 15002-15005 based on
the size of repair and site. Free skin grafts (such as 15100/15101 and
15120/15121) are pieces of skin that are either 
split thickness
(epidermis and part of the dermis) or 
full thickness
 (epidermis and
all of the dermis) as illustrated in 
Fig. 14-22.
 The grafts are completely
freed from the donor site and placed over the recipient site. There is
no connection left between the graft and the donor site (
Fig. 14-23
).
Free skin grafts are reported by recipient 
site, size
 of defect, and 
type
of repair. The size is measured in square centimeters.
 
FIGURE 14–22
Split-thickness skin graft and full-thickness skin graft.
 
 
FIGURE 14–23
A,
 Small, localized, full-thickness burn of the first web
space. 
B,
 Immediate postoperative results, after a dorsal metacarpal
artery flap was transposed into the defect.
Many of the code definitions in the Skin Replacement Surgery and
Skin Substitutes category refer to a measurement in square
centimeters and a percentage of body area. The square centimeters
measurement is applied to adults and children over 10 years of age,
and the percentage of body area is applied to infants and children
under the age of 10.
A 
pinch graft
 (15050) is a small, split-thickness repair. Often a split-
thickness graft is referred to in the patient record as STSG, and a full-
thickness skin graft as FTSG.
Autografts
 are grafts that are taken from the patient’s body (
Fig. 14-
24
), whereas 
allografts
 (homografts) are grafts that are taken from a
human donor. Epidermal autografts (15110-15116) and dermal
autografts (15130-15136) are reported based on graft depth, location,
and size. Tissue cultured skin autografts (15150-15157) are grafts that
are cultured (grown) from the patient’s own skin cells, thereby
reducing the chances of rejection. 
Acellular
 dermal replacement
(15271-15278) is the use of skin replacement products based on the
location and size of repair. 
Temporary
 allografts are also reported
with 15271-15278 based on the location and size of repair. Temporary
grafts are used to protect defect sites while healing is taking place
(
Figs. 14-25
 and 
14-26
). A 
permanent
 graft may be placed over the site
at a later date to complete the repair process.
 
FIGURE 14–24
Appearance during application of meshed autograft.
 
FIGURE 14–25
Three sheets of cultured epithelial autograft are in
place on the left anterior thigh, which 3 weeks before was excised to
muscle fascia and covered with cadaver allograft.
 
FIGURE 14–26
The same area of left anterior thigh in 
Fig. 14-25
, 1
month after grafting.
Allograft/Tissue Cultured Allogeneic Skin Substitutes (15040-15261)
are grafts obtained from a donor genetically different, but of the same
species, which include healthy cadaveric donors. Xenografts are grafts
taken from a different species (cross species, such as pigskin grafts).
Xenografts are also known as heterografts.
Skin Substitute Grafts are reported based on the wound surface
area. For areas up to 100 square centimeters (sq cm) of the trunk,
arms, or legs, report 15271 for the first 25 sq cm and 15272 for each
additional 25 sq cm or part thereof. For areas on the face, scalp,
eyelids, mouth, neck, ears, orbits, genitalia, hands, feet, or multiple
digits, report 15275 for the first 25 sq cm and 15276 for each additional
sq cm. For wound surface areas greater than or equal to 100 sq cm,
report 15273/15274 or 15277/15278 based on the location of the area.
The supply of the skin substitute graft(s) are reported separately.
Flaps. 
A physician may develop a donor site at a location far away from the
recipient site. The graft may have to be accomplished in stages. The
graft code can be assigned more than once when the surgery is
performed in stages. Notes specific to this group of codes state that
when reporting transfer flaps (in several stages), report the 
donor site
when a tube graft (
Fig. 14-27
) is formed for later use or when a
delayed flap is formed before it is transferred (
Fig. 14-28
). The
recipient site
 is reported when the graft is attached to its final site.
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 14–27
A,
 Correction of a radical mastectomy defect with a
tube flap, created from the abdominal pannus. 
B,
 Intermediate inset of
the tube flap following separation from its abdominal blood supply. This
process of “waltzing” or “walking” a tube-flap from the abdomen to the
chest was used by Halsted and Billroth. 
C,
 Final inset into the sternum
before shaping. 
D,
 The lateral half of the tube flap was then detached
laterally and inset into the upper sternum to create the breast shape.
This type of reconstruction usually took more than a year to complete,
with more than a dozen procedures.
 
FIGURE 14–28
A,
 A skin and soft tissue defect extends from alar
lobule into medial cheek. The cheek advancement flap is designed to
repair cheek defect. Separate subcutaneous pedicle transposition flap
is designed to resurface the alar lobule after placement of auricular
cartilage graft 
(arrows)
 along the missing alar margin. 
B,
 Two flaps are
in position.
In a 
delayed graft,
 a portion of the skin is lifted and separated from
the tissue below, but it stays connected to blood vessels at one end.
This keeps the skin viable while it is being moved from one area to
another, and at the same time, it allows the graft to get used to living
on a small supply of blood. It is hoped that living on a small blood
supply will give the graft a better chance of survival when inserted
into the recipient site.
There are two categories of codes for flaps. The first category, Flaps
(Skin and/or Deep Tissues) (15570-15738), is subdivided based on the
type of flap (i.e., pedicle, cross finger, delayed, or muscle flaps) and
then by the location of the flap (scalp, trunk, or lips). The codes do not
include any extensive immobilization that may be necessary, such as a
large plaster cast. Extensive immobilization would be reported in
addition to the flap procedure. Also not included in the flap
procedure codes is the closure of a donor site, which would be
reported in addition to the flap procedure.
The second category, Other Flaps and Grafts (15740-15777), is
subdivided based on the type of flap (free muscle, free skin, fascial, or
hair transplant).
Within the flap codes (15740-15750) the flap (donor site and
recipient site remain connected for a period of time) can be an island
pedicle or a neurovascular pedicle. The pedicle is the end of the flap
that remains connected to the donor area. An 
island pedicle flap
contains an artery and vein, and a 
neurovascular pedicle flap
contains an artery, vein, and nerve. The term “island” refers to the
removal of the fat and subcutaneous tissue prior to implantation into
the recipient site. The neurovascular pedicle flap is used when the
area of defect requires restoration of sensation in the area; for
example, the end of a finger that has sustained damage that destroyed
the sensation on the tip of the finger. A neurovascular graft from an
adjacent finger could restore sensation to the defective area. A flap
from the donor area is freed up and grafted into the recipient area.
The connection between the donor and the recipient sites remains in
place until the graft has satisfactorily healed, at which time the
connection is severed. The donor area may require a separate skin
graft, and that graft would be reported separately.
 
QUICK CHECK 14-2
There are three types of measurements utilized in the Integumentary
System subsection of the CPT manual. Match the procedure with the
type of measurement.
a. 
length in cm
b. 
area in square cm
c. 
diameter in cm
1. 
Skin Grafts/Flaps _____
2. 
Lesion Removal _____
3. 
Wound Repair _____
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Other procedures
The Other Procedures codes (15780-15879) report a wide variety of
repair services, such as abrasion, chemical peel, and blepharoplasty
(surgical reconstruction of the eyelid). The codes are often divided
based on the site or extent of repair.
Dermabrasion
 is used to treat acne, wrinkles, or general keratoses
(horny growth) (
Fig. 14-29
). The skin area is anesthetized by a
chemical that freezes the area (a cryogen), and the area is sanded
down using a motorized brush. The facial dermabrasion codes (15780-
15781) are divided according to the surface area of the face treated
(total, segmental). Areas other than the face are reported with 15782.
 
FIGURE 14–29
Large and disfiguring seborrheic keratosis reveals
evidence of horn pearls.
A tattoo can be removed by dermabrasion. The process involves the
use of a high-speed mechanical wheel to remove the epidermis and
part of the papillary dermis. The service is reported with code 15783.
The 
abrasion
 codes (15786, 15787) report the use of abrasion to
remove a lesion, such as scar tissue, a wart, or a callus. This technique
is often used to remove areas of sun-damaged skin. The first abraded
lesion is reported with 15786, and each additional four or fewer
lesions are reported with 15787.
Chemical peels,
 also known as chemexfoliation, are treatments in
which a chemical is applied to the skin and then removed (
Fig. 14-30
).
The skin surface will then shed its outer layer, much as it does after a
sunburn. The treatment is used for cosmetic purposes, such as
smoothing the wrinkles around the mouth or removing liver spots
(lentigines) (
Fig. 14-31
). The chemical peel codes (15788-15793) are
divided according to whether the peel is on the face or not on the face,
in addition to the depth of the peel (epidermal or dermal).
 
FIGURE 14–30
Chemical peel.
 
FIGURE 14–31
Lentigines of the hand.
Cervicoplasty,
 15819, is a surgical procedure in which the physician
removes excess skin from the neck, usually for cosmetic reasons.
Blepharoplasty
 (15820-15823), also performed predominantly for
cosmetic purposes, is the removal of excess skin and to support the
muscles of the upper eyelid. Rhytidectomy is the removal of wrinkles
by pulling the skin tight and removing the excess. 
Rhytidectomy
codes (15824-15829) report 
these cosmetic services. Excision of excess
skin and subcutaneous tissue of other parts of the body (e.g.,
abdomen, thigh, buttock, and arm) most commonly due to bariatric
surgery is reported with codes in the 15830-15839 range. To report
abdominoplasty with panniculectomy (excision of the hanging tissue
in the abdominal region [
Fig. 14-32
]), report 15830 with add-on code
15847.
 
FIGURE 14–32
Panniculectomy.
Grafts for facial nerve paralysis (15840-15845) are procedures in
which the physician harvests a graft from some location on the body
and places the graft over the area damaged by facial paralysis.
There are also codes in the Other Procedures category for the
removal of sutures and for dressing changes (15850-15852) performed
under anesthesia.
Lipectomy
 (liposuction) codes (15876-15879) are divided according
to the body area being treated—head, trunk, upper extremities, and
lower extremity. If the procedure is performed bilaterally, add
modifier -50 to the procedure code.
Pressure ulcers
Pressure ulcers are also known as decubitus ulcers or bedsores.
Pressure ulcers are located on areas of the body that have bony
projections, such as the hips and the area above the tailbone. Pressure
on these areas causes decreased blood flow, and sores form. With
continued pressure, the sores ulcerate, and deeper layers of tissue,
such as fascia, muscle, and bone, may be affected. As illustrated in 
Fig.
14-33
, the depth of the ulcer is referred to in stages—1, 2, 3, 4. Pressure
ulcers commonly occur in patients who are unable to change position
or have devices that prevent mobility (splints, casts).
FIGURE 14–33
Stages 1, 2, 3, and 4 of pressure ulcers.
Although a pressure ulcer can be seen, the depth to which the
ulceration has penetrated cannot be seen. The ulcer may involve only
superficial skin or may affect deeper layers. The treatment for a
pressure ulcer (15920-15999) is excision of the ulcerated area to the
depth of unaffected tissue, fascia, or muscle.
 
CODING SHOT
Only an adjacent tissue transfer is bundled into the pressure ulcer
codes. If the medical record indicates a myocutaneous flap closure, or
a muscle flap, report codes from both the Pressure Ulcer category
(15920-15999) and from the Flaps (Skin and/or Deep Tissue) category
(15570-15738). Also, if a free skin graft is used to close the ulcer, that
closure would be reported separately with a code from the Other
Flaps and Grafts category.
You will note that many of the Pressure Ulcer codes have “with
ostectomy” as the indented code. An 
ostectomy
 is the removal of the
bone that underlies the ulcer area. The bony prominences are chiseled
or filed down to alleviate future pressure. The operative report will
indicate if the bone was removed.
Read the code descriptions carefully when coding from the ulcer
repair category, as the codes are divided based on the location, type,
and extent of closure required.
Burns
Fig. 14-34
 illustrates the Rule of Nines, which is used to calculate the
percentage of body area in adults. 
Fig. 14-35
 illustrates an example of
the Lund-Browder classification of burns, which is often used to
calculate the percentage of body area in children. Although the Lund-
Browder 
approach is similar to the Rule of Nines, adjustments are
made in the percentages because an infant’s head is larger in
proportion to the rest of his or her body. On the job, the medical coder
is not required to calculate the percentage, as the physician is to
indicate the percentages in the medical record. If the donor site for the
graft requires repair by grafting, an additional graft code is used.
Simple repair (closure) of the donor site is included in the graft code.
 
FIGURE 14–34
Rule of nines, adults.
 
FIGURE 14–35
Example of Lund-Browder chart for estimating the
extent of burns on children.
Burns are classified as first, second, or third degree based on the
depth of the burn. If the medical documentation indicated a burn of
the epidermis, that is a first degree burn, a dermal burn is a second
degree, and a subcutaneous level burn is third degree (
Fig. 14-36
). The
documentation should indicate the degree of burn at each location,
and the physician should be queried if the degree is not stated.
 
FIGURE 14–36
First-, second-, and third-degree burns.
Burn treatment is unique in that it is common for a patient to
undergo multiple dressing changes or debridements (
Fig. 14-37
)
during the healing period. Dressing and debridement codes report
either initial or subsequent treatments. Burn dressing and/or
debridement codes (16020-16030) are divided based on whether the
dressing or debridement is of a small, medium, or large area. The
definition of small is less than 5% of the total body surface area,
medium is the whole face or whole extremity, or 5% to 10% of the
total body surface area, and large is more than one extremity or
greater than 10% of the total body area.
 
FIGURE 14–37
Burn debridement.
Bundled into codes 16000-16036 is the application of dressing, such
as temporary skin replacement. The notes in the Burn, Local
Treatment category state 16020-16030 include application of materials
(e.g., dressings) not described in codes 15100-15278. Some third-party
providers bundle materials, such as Biobrane, into the Burn, Local
Treatment codes. Biobrane® is a biosynthetic skin substitute that is
constructed of a silicone film with a nylon fabric embedded into the
film. Collagen is then embedded into the film and fabric. There are
small pores on the skin substitute to make the covering permeable to
allow for the application of topical antibiotics during healing.
The Burn category contains codes for 
escharotomy
 (16035, 16036), a
procedure in which the physician cuts through the dead skin that
covers the surface when there is a full-thickness burn. The crust covers
the surface and diminishes blood flow and healing.
 
CODING SHOT
Some third-party payers allow you to submit charges for burn care
using the first date of service to the last date of service. This allows
you to indicate multiples of the same service (e.g., ×5 or ×3). Other
payers require you to list each date of service and to report each
service separately. For example, if the patient received five burn
debridements on five separate days, you would report the CPT code
five separate times, once for each day of service.
EXERCISE 14-2
Repair (Closure) and Burns
The patient record states: 
“simple wound repair 12-cm wound, left
hand.”
To locate the code for the repair in the CPT manual Index using the
condition method, you first locate the main term 
Wound,
 and then
the subterm 
Repair.
 Wound is the condition and Repair is the
procedure. You then identify the type of repair (i.e., complex, simple).
To locate the code using the service or procedure method, you
would first locate the main term, 
Repair.
 Repair is the service or
procedure. The subterm 
Wound
 is located next, and finally the type
(i.e., complex, simple). These are just two of the ways to locate this
service in the Index.
From the main term Wound, subterms Repair, Simple, you are
directed to a range of codes, 12001-12021. Locate this range in the CPT
manual. The notes under the subheading, Repair (Closure), are
“must” reading. Also, read the description of the first code in the
category (12001). The description specifies that the code includes the
term hands, which is what you are looking for. Now locate the correct
length (12 cm), and you will have the correct code—12004.
Now you code the following:
The patient record states: complex wound repair on right hand, 3.1
cm.
1 
What are the correct codes?
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
After an assault with a knife, a patient requires simple repair of a 3-
cm laceration of the neck, simple repair of a 4-cm laceration of the
back, simple repair of a 5-cm laceration of the forearm, and complex
repair of a 3-cm laceration of the abdomen. (Note: Remember to use
modifier -59 with the least intensive repair.)
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
3 
Harry Torgerson, a 42-year-old construction worker, is injured at
work when a box containing wood scraps and shingles falls from a
second story scaffolding and strikes him on the left forearm, causing
multiple lacerations. Forearm repairs: a 5.1-cm repair of the
subcutaneous tissues (intermediate closure) and a 5.6-cm laceration,
with particles of shingles and wood materials deeply embedded,
(complex closure). There is also a superficial wound of the scalp of
3.1 cm that requires simple closure.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________, ____________________
4 
A patient with multiple healed scars requests they be removed and
repaired for cosmetic reasons. The defects include a 100-cm
2
 scar of
the right cheek and a 200-cm
2
 defect of the left upper chest. Several
split-thickness skin grafts totaling 300 cm
2
 are harvested from the
left and right thighs. The scar tissue is cut away, and the sites are
prepared for grafting.
Cheek graft: ____________________
Upper chest graft: ____________________,
____________________
Site prep, cheek, 100 cm
2
: ____________________
Site prep, chest, 200 cm
2
: ____________________,
____________________
5 
The patient had a 20-cm
2
 defect of the right cheek that was repaired
with a rotation flap (adjacent tissue transfer).
CPT Code: ____________________
6 
The patient had a 10-cm
2
 malignant neoplasm removed from the
forehead. Z-plasty was used to repair this site. How would the
excision and repair be coded?
CPT Code: ____________________
7 
A patient has had a portion of his mandible removed due to excision
of a malignant tumor. Repair of the site is now performed by use of
a myocutaneous flap graft.
CPT Code: ____________________
8 
A patient incurs second- and third-degree burns of the abdomen and
thigh (10%) when she pulls a pan of boiling water off the stove. She
requires daily debridements or dressing changes for the first week
(Monday through Friday, ×5). She is in severe pain and requires
anesthesia during these treatments. During the following 2 weeks
she will be receiving dressing changes every other day (Monday,
Wednesday, Friday, ×6), and it is expected that enough healing will
have taken place that anesthesia will not be necessary. What codes
would be reported for services during the 3-week treatment period?
Week 1 CPT Code: ____________________
Weeks 2 and 3 CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Destruction
The next subheading in the subsection of the Integumentary System is
Destruction. The codes report destruction of lesions by means 
other
than excision.
 Codes 17000-17286 are for benign, premalignant, or
malignant lesions destroyed by means of electrosurgery (use of
various forms of electrical current to destroy the lesion), cryosurgery
(use of extreme cold), laser (Light Amplification by Stimulated
Emission of Radiation), or chemicals (acids). Read the notes under the
Destruction subsection heading because they contain a list of types of
lesions. Destruction codes state “any method” and are divided
according to type of lesion (benign or malignant). Further divisions
are based on the number of lesions destroyed or the size of the area
destroyed. The malignant lesions are divided based on location (nose,
ear, and so forth) and size (0.6-1.0 cm, and so forth), regardless of the
method used.
Codes 17000-17004 report destruction of lesions by the number
treated. For example, a patient goes to his or her physician to have 20
lesions removed using cryosurgery reported with 17004. If the patient
had six lesions removed, the first one would be reported with 17000
and lesions two through six are reported with 17003 × 5. Careful
reading of the coding guidelines is a must for proper reporting of
destruction codes.
Mohs micrographic surgery
One sophisticated procedure is Mohs micrographic surgery (17311-
17315). The method is named after the physician who pioneered the
basic microscopic technique, Frederic Mohs, MD. The microscope is
used during the surgical procedure to view the lesion and assess its
invasion by a single physician acting in two separate and distinct
capacities—surgeon and pathologist. If another physician is delegated
the role of pathologist, these codes should not be reported. If the
lesion is malignant, it is immediately removed. Mohs micrographic
surgery is especially useful in cases of large tumors. The procedure
involves mapping the exact contour 
of the tumor and removing tissue
down to the level at which cancerous cells are no longer found. The
process involves stages in which the surgeon removes a layer of skin
and examines it under a microscope for cancerous cells, then returns
to the lesion to remove another layer of skin, again examining it under
a microscope (
Fig. 14-38
). This process is continued until cancerous
cells are no longer identified in the layers being removed. The surgeon
acts as both the pathologist and the surgeon.
 
From the Trenches
“Find a subspecialty you like... [and] if it’s a surgical subspecialty, get as
many operative reports as you can. Read them. Compare the codes in the
book to what’s on the operative report. See if you can get into the operating
room with the doctors... [and] know your sterile field techniques so you know
what NOT to touch!”
CHRIS
 
FIGURE 14–38
Mohs micrographic surgical technique.
The codes in the category include the removal of the lesion(s) and
pathologic evaluation of the lesion(s). These codes are also divided
based on the stage (e.g., first, second) of the surgery and the number
of tissue blocks the surgeon takes during the surgery for pathologic
examination.
A new patient presents to the dermatologist with a lesion, and the
dermatologist performs a biopsy that he then examines in the office
using a microscope. His determination is that the lesion is basal cell
carcinoma, and he advises the patient to have the lesion removed the
same day using Mohs microscopic technique. The patient consents to
this and the dermatologist makes arrangements to remove the lesion
later that day. According to the notes before 17311, if a biopsy of a
suspected skin cancer is “performed on the same day as Mohs surgery
because there was no prior pathology confirmation of a diagnosis,
then report diagnostic skin biopsy (11100, 11101) and frozen section
pathology (88331) with modifier 59 to distinguish from the subsequent
definitive surgical procedure of Mohs surgery.” This means that you
would report 11100-59 and add-on code 11101-59 (biopsy service), if
more than one biopsy was performed and 88331-59 (pathology
service) because the primary procedure is the Mohs surgery (17311).
 
QUICK CHECK 14-3
1. 
The Mohs notes before 17311-17315 indicate repairs are:
a. 
bundled
b. 
reported separately
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 14-3
Destruction
1 
Electrosurgical destruction of a herpetic lesion
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Cryosurgical destruction of 14 actinic keratoses
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________ × ____________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Mohs micrographic surgery by a single physician removing and
examining three specimens, first stage of the neck
 
CPT Code(s): ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Breast procedures
Breast procedures (19000-19499) are divided according to category of
procedure (e.g., incision, excision, introduction, repair and/or
reconstruction). You must read the documentation to identify the
procedure used, such as incisional versus excisional biopsies. In an
incisional biopsy
, an incision is made into the lesion and a small
portion of the lesion is taken out. In an 
excisional biopsy
, the entire
lesion is removed for biopsy. In some cases it may be necessary to
mark the lesion preoperatively by placing a marker to identify its
exact location (
Fig. 14-39
). The marker or location device is placed to
allow the physician to precisely identify the depth and position of the
needle placement to obtain a breast tissue biopsy. After the biopsy, the
location device may be left in place to identify the biopsied area on
subsequent mammography. Percutaneous breast biopsies are reported
with 19081-19086 based on the guidance method. A location device
(clip, metallic pellet, wire, needle, radioactive seed) placed without a
biopsy is reported with 19281-19288 based on the guidance method.
 
 
FIGURE 14–39
Wire marker used to mark breast lesion. 
A,
Mammography is used to place a preoperative needle used to mark a
lesion. 
B,
 The wire marker serves as a guide for the surgeon to perform
the biopsy.
There are many mastectomy codes, and you need to carefully
review the operative report to confirm whether pectoral muscles,
axillary lymph nodes, or internal mammary lymph nodes were also
removed. This information will be necessary to determine the correct
mastectomy code.
A 
partial
 mastectomy (19301) is one in which only a portion of the
breast tissue is removed. If an axillary lymphadenectomy is
performed with a partial mastectomy, report the service with 19302. A
partial mastectomy is also known as a lumpectomy, segmentectomy,
or tylectomy. 
Fig. 14-40
 illustrates the quadrants and axillary tail of
the breast. 
Fig. 14-41
 illustrates the simple, modified radical, radical,
and partial mastectomies.
 
FIGURE 14–40
Female breast quadrants and axillary tail.
 
FIGURE 14–41
Mastectomies: 
A,
 Simple; 
B,
 Modified radical; 
C,
Radical; 
D,
 Partial.
A 
simple
 or 
complete
 mastectomy (19303) is one in which all of the
subcutaneous tissue and breast tissue are removed and the nipple and
skin may or may not be removed. A 
subcutaneous
 mastectomy
(19304) is one in which the skin and muscle is left but all the breast
tissue is removed.
A 
modified radical
 mastectomy (19307) is one in which the breast is
removed in addition to the axillary lymph nodes, and the pectoralis
minor muscle may or may not be removed. The pectoralis major
muscle is not removed in the modified radical mastectomy.
A 
radical
 mastectomy (19305) is one in which the entire breast is
removed in addition to the pectoral muscles and axillary lymph nodes
(
Fig. 14-42
). Code 19306 reports another type of radical mastectomy
that includes the internal mammary lymph nodes and is also known
as an Urban type operation.
 
FIGURE 14–42
Mastectomy procedure.
A breast lesion is often identified as a result of a screening
mammogram, and a breast biopsy is then scheduled. During the
biopsy, a specimen is obtained and sent to the pathologist for analysis.
This biopsy is reported separately and is not bundled into the
screening mammogram or any subsequent procedure. However, if a
biopsy is obtained in the operating room and based on the results of
the biopsy, a mastectomy is performed, the biopsy is bundled into the
mastectomy.
The Repair and/or Reconstruction codes 19316-19396 include codes
to report breast reduction (19318), augmentation (breast enlargement,
19324, 19325), and breast reconstruction (19357-19369). The
reconstruction for 19357 includes the insertion of a tissue expander
and the subsequent expansion. The tissue expander is placed to
stretch the skin overlying the breast to allow for insertion of a
permanent prosthesis.
 
CODING SHOT
Any breast procedure performed on 
both
 breasts must be reported as
a bilateral procedure (modifier -50).
EXERCISE 14-4
Breast Procedures
Locate the correct code for the following procedures. Be sure to read
all notes in the CPT manual and the description of the code before
applying the code.
1 
Aspiration of one cyst, breast
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Simple, complete bilateral mastectomies
 
CPT Code(s): ____________________
3 
Right modified radical mastectomy, including axillary lymph nodes
without any muscles
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Preoperative placement of one breast wire by magnetic resonance
guidance, left breast
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Reconstruction of nipple/areola, right breast
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
CONGRATULATIONS!
 You made it through the entire
Integumentary System subsection! The subsection is quite
complicated, and you have done a great job if you understand the
basics of these codes. As you use these codes here and on the job,
your knowledge will continue to grow.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 14, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 Is there a restriction on what type of providers may report codes
from the Integumentary System subsection? __________
2 Incision and Drainage codes are first divided according to what?
______________________________________________
3 What modifier should not be applied to nail removal codes?
__________________________________________________
4 What type of repair involves complicated wound closure?
____________________________________________________
5 What type of biopsy is reported when the entire lesion is removed?
____________________________________________
6 What type of mastectomy is reported when the entire breast is
removed in addition to the pectoral muscles and axillary lymph
nodes?
______________________________________________________________________________________
Chapter 14, part I, theory
Match the following:
1 Component of wound repair _____________________
2 Criteria for determining repair code ______________
3 Classification of wound repair __________________
a intermediate
b length
c ligation
Match the following:
4 Component of wound repair ___________________
5 Criteria for determining repair code _____________
6 Classification of wound repair __________________
a exploration
b complex
c site of repair
Match the following:
7 Component of wound repair ___________________
8 Criteria for determining repair code _____________
9 Classification of wound repair __________________
a simple
b debridement
c complexity
10 Modifier -51 indicates what?
_____________________________________________ (two words)
11 What is the title for the information that precedes each section?
____________________
12 The cleansing of an area or wound is called
________________________.
13 A(n) ____________________ biopsy may be performed to excise a
disc of tissue.
14 What is the term for the elastic material formed into a sac that is
then filled with fluid or air? ____________________ (two words)
15 What is the name of the graft that is taken from the patient’s body?
____________________
16 The major distinction in coding destruction of lesions is whether
the lesion is ____________________ or malignant.
17 The division of malignant lesion excision is based on
_________________ and size.
18 What is the procedure used to treat acne or wrinkles by means of
sanding? ____________________
19 In order to report Mohs surgery, the physician would act as the
surgeon and the ____________________.
20 In a(n) ____________________ biopsy, the entire lesion is removed
for biopsy.
Chapter 14, part II, practical
Code the following cases for the surgical procedures and office visits only. Do
not code the radiology services or laboratory work that may be included
(Separate multiple codes with a comma and then a space in your response.
XXXXX, XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier
answers. XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces.
XXXXX x X).
21 Margaret Wilson, a 26-year-old mother of three (new patient), has
routine screening mammography of both breasts. (You do not need to
code the mammography.) A shadow is visualized in the right breast.
The physician performs a biopsy (needle core). The biopsy indicates
malignancy. The patient agrees to and has a mastectomy (simple,
complete) 1 week later.
There is no global period on this procedure.
Pathology report indicated a primary malignant
neoplasm.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
22 Shirley Peters, age 80, an established patient, presents to the office
for removal of 12 skin tags.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
23 Removal of 180-cm
2
 strawberry nevus of left cheek, autograft with
split-thickness skin graft of 180 cm2
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________, ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
24 Nipple reconstruction
CPT Code: ____________________
25 Destruction of 0.4-cm malignant lesion of the neck
CPT Code: ____________________
26 Simple repair of a superficial wound of the genitalia; 2.4 cm
CPT Code: ____________________
27 Adjacent tissue transfer of chin defect; 9 cm
2
CPT Code: ____________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 15
Musculoskeletal system
 
“Be the individual always willing to step in and help. Be the one to
recognize issues and have solutions to those issues.”
Martha Tracy, CPC, CPC-I
Coding & Compliance Manager
 
Mid-America Cardiology
 
Kansas City, Kansas
CHAPTER TOPICS
Format
Fractures and Dislocations
General
Application of Casts and Strapping
Endoscopy/Arthroscopy
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Differentiate between fracture and dislocation treatment types.
2 
Understand types of traction.
3 
Identify services/procedures included in the General subheading.
4 
Analyze cast application and strapping procedures.
5 
Understand elements of arthroscopic procedures.
6 
Demonstrate the ability to code musculoskeletal services and
procedures.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Format
The Musculoskeletal System subsection is formatted by anatomic site,
such as General, Head, and Neck.
The first subheading in this subsection is General, and it contains
procedures that are applicable to many different anatomic sites. The
other subheadings are further divided by anatomic site, procedure
type, condition, and description. They usually include:
■
 
Incision
■
 
Excision
■
 
Introduction or Removal
■
 
Repair, Revision, and/or Reconstruction
■
 
Fracture and/or Dislocation
■
 
Arthrodesis
■
 
Amputation
Any or all of these categories of procedures may be located under
each subheading.
The codes in the Musculoskeletal System subsection are reported
extensively by orthopedic surgeons to describe the services provided
to restore and preserve the function of the skeletal system. There are
many codes, however, that are used frequently by a wide variety of
primary care and family practice physicians, such as the splinting,
casting, and fracture codes. Your study of the Musculoskeletal
subsection of the CPT will focus on the format of the subsection,
fracture types and repair, application of casts and strapping, the
General subheading, and endoscopic procedures.
Thorough review of the medical record will help you to identify key
information necessary for coding. The following tips will help you to
choose the most correct code from this subsection:
1. 
Identify whether the procedure is being performed on soft tissue or
bone.
Many Musculoskeletal System Excision codes to
report tumor excision are based on if the tumor
is of the:
■
 
Subcutaneous soft tissue tumors (below the skin
but above the deep fascia)
■
 
Fascial or subfascial soft tissue tumors (within
or below deep fascia, but not involving bone)
■
 
Radical resection of soft tissue tumors
(subcutaneous or subfascial but with wide
margins, appreciable vessel exploration, and/or
repair/reconstruction of nerves)
■
 
Radical resection of bone tumors (wide margins,
appreciable vessel exploration, and/or
repair/reconstruction of nerves and complex
bone repair/reconstruction)
Careful reading of Musculoskeletal section
guidelines is a must before reporting excision of
tumors.
2. 
Determine whether treatment is for a traumatic injury (acute) or a
medical condition (chronic). The diagnosis codes indicating acute or
chronic must match the treatment codes. External cause/E codes from
ICD-10-CM should also be assigned to describe accidents and injuries.
3. 
Identify the most specific anatomic site. For example, when coding
vertebral procedures, it is necessary to know whether the procedure
was for cervical, thoracic, or lumbar vertebrae.
4. 
Determine whether the code description includes grafting or
fixation. If grafting or fixation is not listed within the major procedure
code description, each may be reported as an additional procedure.
5. 
Read the code carefully to determine whether it describes a
procedure that was on a single site (e.g., each finger). If the same
procedure is performed on multiple sites (e.g., multiple fingers), you
must indicate the number of units (such as 26060 × 2) or list the code
multiple times. HCPCS modifiers are used to identify the digit treated,
such as F6 for right hand, second digit.
 
From the Trenches
“Be willing to constantly learn and research questions. Network with other
coders, have fun and passion for your job!”
MARTHA
6. 
Check any medical terms you do not understand in a medical
dictionary or in the Glossary at the back of the book.
Fractures and dislocations
Fractures
Fractures are coded by treatment—open, closed, or percutaneous.
Open treatment
 of a fracture is made when a surgery is performed in
which the fracture is exposed by an incision made over the fracture
and the fractured bone is visualized. 
Closed treatment
 is performed
when the physician repairs the fracture without directly visualizing
the fracture. The treatment method used—open or closed—depends
on the type and severity of the fracture. A closed fracture (
Fig. 15-1
)
may receive either closed, open, or percutaneous fixation, whereas a
more complicated compound fracture usually requires an open
treatment to provide internal fixation (e.g., wires, pins, screws).
Fractures are coded to the specific anatomic site and then according to
whether manipulation was performed. All fractures and dislocations
are reported based on the reason for the treatment. For instance, if a
hip replacement (arthroplasty) is performed for medical reasons, such
as 
osteoarthritis,
 it is reported with 27130, located under the
subheading Pelvis and Hip Joint, category Repair, Revision, and/or
Reconstruction. The osteoarthritis that caused the breakdown of the
bone of the hip requiring repair was the reason for the treatment. If
the hip replacement was performed for a 
fracture,
 it is reported with
27236, located under the subheading Pelvis and Hip Joint, category
Fracture and/or Dislocation. The fracture, which is not a progressive,
degenerative disease, was the reason for the treatment.
 
FIGURE 15–1
Types of fractures.
The CPT manual defines closed, open, and percutaneous treatments
as follows:
Closed Treatment:
 This terminology is used to describe procedures
that treat fractures by one of three methods: (1) without
manipulation, (2) with manipulation, or (3) with or without traction.
Manipulation
 is attempted reduction, which is an attempt to
maneuver the bone back into proper alignment. The physician may
bend, rotate, pull, or guide the bone back into position.
Closed treatment without manipulation
 is a procedure in which the
physician immobilizes the bone with a splint, cast, or other device
but without having to manipulate the fracture into alignment. Code
25500 describes a closed treatment of a radial shaft fracture without
manipulation. This code is correctly reported when a patient has a
broken but stable radial shaft that is not displaced and the physician
only applies a cast. Initial casting or splinting services are included
in the fracture care, but the supplies used are not. Initial splinting or
casting of fractures performed by another physician as the only
service can be reported by that physician (i.e., an emergency
department physician). If the cast needs to be removed and
reapplied during the global period, the surgeon that charged the
global fee may report the cast/splint application with 29000-29799
and append modifier -58 (staged or related procedure/service).
Only charge for cast removal without reapplication if the physician
or physician group is not assuming care for the fracture.
Closed treatment with manipulation
 is a procedure in which the
physician has to reduce (put back in place) a fracture. Code 21320
describes a closed treatment of a nasal bone fracture with
stabilization, as illustrated in 
Fig. 15-2
. This code is correctly
reported when a patient has a displaced nose that requires
manipulation to return it to the normal position. The physician
would then apply external and/or internal splints to immobilize the
nose.
Open treatment
 is used when the fracture is opened (exposed to the
external environment). In this instance, the fracture (bone) is open
to view and internal fixation (pins, screws, etc.) may be used. For
example, 23630, open treatment of greater humeral tuberosity
fracture, includes internal fixation when performed. The physician
opens the site, reduces the fracture, and applies internal fixation, as
needed to maintain anatomic position of the fracture.
 
FIGURE 15–2
Realignment and support of nasal fracture.
Fractures are divided based on whether the fracture is pathological
(occurred in an area of weakness) or traumatic (due to injury).
Fracture codes are reported with a 7th character to indicate whether
the fracture care was:
■
 
Initial or a subsequent encounter
■
 
Open or closed
Open
 means the fracture has broken through the bone cortex and
the bone has been exposed to air (elements).
Closed
 means the fracture is not exposed to air.
■
 
Healing was routine or delayed
■
 
Nonunion
 
QUICK CHECK 15-1
1. 
Which code would be reported for a repair of a femoral shaft
fracture using an intramedullary rod?
a. 
27506
b. 
27507
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Percutaneous skeletal fixation
 describes fracture treatment that is
neither open nor closed. In this procedure, the fracture is not open to
view, but fixation (e.g., pin, screw) is placed across the fracture site,
usually under x-ray imaging. For example, percutaneous skeletal
fixation of a fracture of the great toe, phalanx, or phalanges with
manipulation (28496). This procedure is performed entirely
percutaneously.
Areas of bones, as 
Fig. 15-3
 illustrates, are important to know when
identifying the location of a fracture. For example, there may be an
open treatment of a proximal fibula fracture (27784), proximal being
closer to the body, or of a distal fibula fracture (27792), distal being
further from the body.
 
CODING SHOT
If the physician attempts a reduction of a fracture but is unable to
align the fracture successfully, you still report a reduction service.
List the attempted reduction service code and then list the more
involved fracture care (i.e., open, endoscopic) the physician
successfully performed to reduce the fracture with modifier -58
(staged or related procedure/service) appended.
 
FIGURE 15–3
Areas of the tibia.
Traction definitions are as follows:
Traction
 is the application of pulling force to hold a bone in alignment
(
Fig. 15-4
).
Skeletal traction
 is the use of internal devices, such as pins, screws, or
wires. The devices are inserted into the bone through the skin, with
ends of the pins, screws, or wires sticking out through the skin, so
traction devices can be attached (
Fig. 15-5
).
TOOLBOX 15-1
 
Jerry broke his arm when he fell from a tree that he was trimming in
his backyard.
Questions
What three External Cause codes do you assign? ___________ (fall =
cause), _________ (accident = place), and _________ (activity code)
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
 
FIGURE 15–4
Traction is the application of a pulling force to hold a
bone in alignment.
 
FIGURE 15–5
Skeletal traction uses the patient’s bones to secure
internal devices to which traction is attached.
Skin traction
 involves strapping, elastic wrap, or tape that is fastened
to the skin or wrapped around the limb. Weights are then attached
to apply force to the fracture (
Fig. 15-6
).
 
FIGURE 15–6
Skin traction utilizes strapping, wraps, or tape to which
traction is attached.
Dislocations
Dislocation is the displacement of a bone from its normal location in a
joint (
Fig. 15-7
), and the treatment of the dislocation injury is to return
the bone to its normal location (anatomic alignment) by a variety of
methods. For example, if a finger was dislocated and the bone did not
protrude through the skin, the physician may administer a digital
block (
Fig. 15-8
) and apply gentle traction until the finger realigns. A
splint would then be applied to keep the finger immobile for about 3
weeks. If the shoulder was dislocated, the physician might elevate the
arm and rotate the humerus while applying pressure to the head of
the humerus. Or the patient might lie face down on a table with the
arm hanging off the edge while a weight is attached to the hand; the
weight is sufficient to pull the arm back into place (
Fig. 15-9
). If
external measures such as those just described do not relocate the
joint, surgical reduction might be indicated.
 
QUICK CHECK 15-2
1. 
According to the Musculoskeletal System notes before 20005, does
the type of fracture/dislocation (i.e., open, closed) determine the
type of treatment (e.g., open, closed)?
Yes or No?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
FIGURE 15–7
Vertebral and subglenoid dislocations.
 
FIGURE 15–8
Digital nerve block.
 
FIGURE 15–9
External technique for relocation of a shoulder (Stimson
technique).
EXERCISE 15-1
Fractures and Dislocations
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, provide the codes for the
following:
1 
Nasal bone fracture, closed treatment
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Uncomplicated, closed treatment of sternum fracture
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Interphalangeal joint dislocation of toe, open treatment with internal
fixation
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Open distal fibula fracture repair with internal fixation
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Femoral shaft fracture repair using closed treatment
CPT Code: ____________________
6 
Percutaneous skeletal fixation of impact fracture of proximal end,
femoral neck
CPT Code: ____________________
7 
Open treatment of shoulder dislocation with closed fracture of the
greater humeral tuberosity, non-displaced
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
8 
Closed treatment of closed mandibular fracture, including
interdental fixation
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
9 
Percutaneous skeletal fixation of a closed distal radius fracture
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
10 
Closed ankle dislocation, closed treatment
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
General
The first subheading in the Musculoskeletal subsection is General. As
the name implies, this subheading includes miscellaneous procedures
that are not specific to an anatomic site.
Incision
The first code is 20005, used to report the incision and drainage of a
soft tissue abscess
 that is below the deep fascia (subfascial). There are
codes in the Integumentary System for incisions 
that are for skin only.
What makes 20005 different from those in the Integumentary System
is that 20005 is reported when the abscess is associated with the deep
tissue and possibly even down to the bone that underlies the area of
abscess. The physician would make an incision into the abscess,
explore and clean the abscess, and debride it (remove dead tissue).
This procedure is very different from the procedures you report with
Integumentary System codes for incision of an abscess.
Wound exploration
The Wound Exploration codes (20100-20103) report traumatic wounds
that result from a penetrating trauma (e.g., gunshot, knife wound).
Wound Exploration codes include basic exploration and repair of the
area of trauma. These codes are used specifically when the repair
requires enlargement of the existing wound for exploration, cleaning,
and repair. Included in the Wound Exploration codes are not only the
exploration and enlargement of the wound but also debridement,
removal of any foreign body(ies), ligation of minor blood vessel(s),
and repair of subcutaneous tissues, muscle fascia, and muscle, as
would be necessary to repair the wound (
Fig. 15-10
).
 
FIGURE 15–10
Gunshot wound requiring exploration.
If the wound does not require enlargement, you would report a
code from the Integumentary System, Skin Repair codes. If, however,
the wound is more severe than a Wound Exploration code would
indicate, the repair code would come from the specific repair by
anatomic site codes. For example, for a bullet wound to the chest with
suspicion of cardiac injury, the treatment will be thoracotomy of any
approach, as illustrated in 
Fig. 15-11
, with control of the hemorrhage
and repair of any injured intrathoracic organ. The thoracotomy code is
located in the subsection Respiratory System under the subheading
Lungs. As you can see from this example, you have to assess the
extent of the procedure carefully, reading the medical record to ensure
you are in the correct area so you can choose the correct code. In the
case of the bullet wound to the chest, the wound exploration is
included in the thoracotomy and would not be reported separately.
 
QUICK CHECK 15-3
1. 
Penetrating wound exploration may be coded from the
Musculoskeletal System, Integumentary System, or the appropriate
____________ site.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
FIGURE 15–11
Median sternotomy was performed because of the
position of the entrance wound and the suspicion of cardiac injury.
Palpation of the left hemidiaphragm revealed a defect and indicated
laparotomy.
Excision
The Excision category (20150-20251) codes are for the biopsies of
muscle and bone. The codes are divided based on the type of biopsy
(muscle, bone), the depth of the biopsy (superficial, deep), and, in
some codes, the method of obtaining the biopsy (e.g., percutaneous
needle).
The procedure for a muscle or bone biopsy typically includes the
administration of local anesthetic into the biopsy area, an incision into
the area allowing exposure of the muscle or bone, removal of tissue
for biopsy, and suturing of the area. A 
percutaneous biopsy
, as
represented in 20206, differs in that the area is not opened to the
physician’s view. A trocar (hollow needle) or needle is placed into the
muscle or bone by passing the needle through the skin and into the
muscle or bone and withdrawing a sample. When the percutaneous
method is used to obtain a biopsy, the area does not require suturing.
If the biopsy is extremely complicated, the surgeon may request the
assistance of ultrasound to be able to view the biopsy area during the
procedure and receive guidance as to the placement of the needle.
Notice the guideline in the CPT following 20206 directs you to the
radiology codes if imaging guidance is utilized during the procedure.
Biopsy codes in the Excision category of the General subheading are
not to be reported for the excision of tumors of muscle. If the medical
record indicates excision of a muscle tumor, you would have to
choose a code from the correct Musculoskeletal subsection. For
example, 24071 reports excision of a tumor, 3 cm or greater, from the
soft tissue of the upper arm or elbow.
Biopsy codes do not include the pathology workup that is
performed on the sample.
General introduction or removal
Within the Introduction or Removal category there is a wide variety of
injection, aspiration, insertion, application, removal, and adjustment
codes. Because the category is within the General subheading of the
Musculoskeletal subsection, the codes also have a wide application in
coding services.
Therapeutic 
sinus tract injection
 procedure codes are within this
category. You may initially think of the nasal sinuses, but these are not
the sinuses that are being injected here. The term “sinus” refers to a
cyst or abscess inside the body with a tract (known as a fistula)
connecting to another surface—internal (to the gut) or external (to the
skin). The infection is treated by injecting an antibiotic or other
substance into the sinus by way of the sinus tract. With certain sinus
injections, a radiologist provides guidance to ensure the correct
placement of the needle and the guidance is reported separately. For
example, an interstitial abscess located perirectally develops a sinus
tract opening perianally may be treated by instilling a caustic
substance to stimulate healing. Other methods that may be used in
treatment of the sinus tract are the incision or opening of the tract
(fistulotomy) to promote healing or excision (fistulectomy) of the tract.
Removal
 codes located in the Introduction or Removal category
(20520-20525) report the removal of a foreign body lodged in muscle
or tendon. Recall that the Integumentary System removal codes
describe foreign bodies lodged in the skin. 
Injection
 codes in this
category report injections made into a tendon, ligament, or ganglion
cyst (cystic tumor). An example of the use of these injection codes
would be a corticosteroid injection as a ganglion cyst treatment.
 
CODING SHOT
You must read the codes carefully. For most injection codes (i.e.,
20550, 20551, 20553) the code description states “Injection(s).” This
means that one or more injections can be reported with the same code
with no modifier.
Arthrocentesis
 is aspiration of a joint (
Fig. 15-12
), and the codes to
report such a service are in the range of 20600-20611. Arthrocentesis is
a procedure commonly used in the treatment of joint conditions. The
area over the involved joint is injected with anesthetic, a needle is
inserted into the joint, and fluid is withdrawn.
 
FIGURE 15–12
Arthrocentesis of a joint.
New codes for arthrocentesis procedures were created to include
ultrasound guidance, codes 20604, 20606, and 20611. The existing
arthrocentesis codes were revised to state “not using ultrasound
guidance” (20600, 20605, 20610).
Example
The anteromedial aspect of the right knee was prepped with Betadine
based skin prep. Using ultrasound guidance in an anteromedial
portal, a single vial of Synvisc-One hyaluronic acid solution was
injected into the right knee. A permanent image of this procedure has
been recorded and saved in the patient’s medical record file.
Code: 20611
Code 20612 reports an aspiration and/or injection of a ganglion cyst,
which is a rubbery swelling that may occur anywhere on the body but
usually occurs over a joint or tendon of the wrist or foot. The
treatment of a ganglion cyst is surgical removal, aspiration, or
aspiration with injection of a corticosteroid. Often, ganglion cysts will
appear in a cluster and if multiple cysts are treated, report the service
with 20612 with modifier -59 appended.
 
CODING SHOT
The code descriptions for arthrocentesis indicate that the codes can be
used for an aspiration, an injection, or both an aspiration and an
injection. You would not report the performance of both an aspiration
and an injection at the same session by using multiple codes, as that
would be unbundling. You would instead report both services using
a single code.
The arthrocentesis codes are divided according to whether the joint
is small (finger, toe), intermediate (ankle, elbow), or major (shoulder,
hip). Note that while the shoulder is a major joint, the
acromioclavicular joint, which is a part of the shoulder, is only an
intermediate joint. This often leads to incorrectly coding the
acromioclavicular joint as a major joint rather than as an intermediate
joint. Codes are also divided by with or without guidance.
Lidocaine, Marcaine, and so forth, when used as anesthetics, are not
reported separately. Any injected therapeutic drug such as a steroid is
reported separately using a HCPCS J code (drug code).
Insertion of wires or pins
 to repair a bone (20650) is a procedure
often used by orthopedic physicians. The procedure is performed
using a local or general anesthetic. The bone is drilled through with a
power drill and pins and/or wires are placed through the holes in the
bone and allowed to emerge through the skin on each side of the
bone. A traction device is then attached to the pins or wires to hold
the bone immobile while healing takes place (refer to 
Fig. 15-5
). This
may sound painful, but actually, the procedure is used to allow well-
aligned healing, as well as alleviate pain.
 
CODING SHOT
The removal of the external skeletal wires or pins is included in the
reimbursement for fixation; but for internal fixation removal, report
separately using 20670, 20680.
The codes to report the 
application
 of many of the devices used for
fixation of the bones of the body during the healing process—cranial
tong, cranial halo, pelvic halo, femoral halo, caliper, stereotactic frame
—are located in this category. Each of the applications includes the
removal of the device, unless the device is removed by another
physician (20665). When the application of these devices is performed
through an open surgical procedure, the procedure is referred to as an
open reduction with internal fixation 
(ORIF)
 and uses pins, wires, and
screws to stabilize a fracture.
Implant removal codes (20670, 20680) are available for reporting the
services of removal of buried wires, pins, rods, etc., previously
implanted. If, for example, there is a complication, such as pain, the
hardware may be removed. Diagnosis coding must support the
necessity of removal of the deep hardware as a complication. If
removed during the global period, report the service with modifier -58
(staged) appended to the procedure code. The implant removal codes
are divided according to whether the implants are superficial or deep.
External fixation
 is the application of a device that holds a bone in
place, but unlike internal fixation, the device is placed on the outside
of the body and pins or wires are placed into the bone from the
outside (
Fig. 15-13
). These wires and pins, when fastened to the bone,
hold the device or system immobile. This type of fixation is commonly
used with comminuted fractures (fragmented) that are difficult to
hold in place. External fixation is used primarily in cases of limb
fracture, major pelvic disruption, osteotomy, arthrodesis, bone
infection, and bone lengthening.
 
 
FIGURE 15–13
A,
 External fixation (Ilizarov multiplane). 
B,
 Example
of an external fixation device on the right leg. The left leg is in a splint.
Codes 20690 and 20692 report whether the device or system is
placed on one surface (uniplane) or several surfaces (multiplane).
With the uniplane device, two or more pins are inserted above the
fracture site and two or more pins are inserted below the fracture site.
Multiplane devices are more complicated and are usually reserved for
highly complex fractures (see 
Fig. 15-13
).
 
CODING SHOT
The fixation devices codes are reported in addition to the code for the
treatment of the fracture, unless the application code specifically
states that fracture repair is included. For example, see code 25545:
“Open treatment of ulnar shaft fracture includes internal fixation,
when performed.” This code specifies both the treatment of the
fracture and the fixation. External fixation, if performed, would be
reported separately.
Note also that most of the codes in the Introduction or Removal
categories are for 
unilateral
 services, so if a procedure is bilateral you
would assign modifier -50.
If the device is 
adjusted,
 the service is reported separately (20693).
Removal
 of external fixation devices or systems is usually
accomplished under anesthesia and is reported separately from the
application (20694). However, if the removal does not require return
to the operating room, you would not report the service separately but
would consider the removal as being bundled into the application
code. If the removal was performed outside the global period, some
payers may reimburse the removal as an E/M service.
EXERCISE 15-2
General
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, provide the codes for the
following:
1 
Exploration of a penetrating wound of the left leg
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Replantation of right foot after a complete, traumatic amputation
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Radical resection of sarcoma of cheek, less than 2 cm
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Nonoperative, electrical stimulation of nonhealing femur fracture
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Percutaneous needle biopsy of muscle of upper arm in a patient
with congenital myotonic muscular dystrophy
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
Intra-articular aspiration and injection without guidance of finger
joint for primary osteoarthritis
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Grafts (or implants)
Codes 20900-20938 report the harvesting of bone, cartilage, fascia lata,
tendon, or tissue through an incision separate from that used to
implant the graft. Graft material is used in a wide variety of repair
procedures. For example, if a tibial fracture has failed to heal in 20
weeks, the surgeon may decide that the fracture requires bone
grafting to achieve healing. Bone grafting is also used in cases of large
defects (>6 cm). Some types of fractures commonly heal with
difficulty, so after debridement the surgeon may decide to allow a 5-
to 7-day healing period before the bone grafting procedure is
performed. The grafts are obtained from the patient or a donor.
Donors can be either living or deceased (cadaver). The pieces of bone
are shaped into bars or pegs and then used to repair the defect.
Fascia lata grafts
 are taken from the mid-upper lateral thigh area
because the fascia is thickest in this area. Fascia is the fibrous tissue
that serves as connective tissue; it may be shaved off with an
instrument called a stripper or it may be incised (cut) away. The fascia
lata is then used in the repair procedure. Codes for obtaining the
fascia lata graft are based on whether a stripper (20920) was used to
remove the fascia or whether a more complex removal procedure
(20922) was required to obtain the graft material.
Tissue grafts
 include obtaining of the fat, dermis, paratenon (loose
connective tissue from the tendon compartment), and other tissue
types. 
Spine surgery
 codes 20930-20938 report 
the obtaining and
shaping of the tissue, whether from the patient (autograft) or from a
donor (allograft). The obtaining and shaping of the spine graft
material is reported in addition to reporting the implantation
procedure, which is the primary procedure (definitive procedure),
unless the description of the major procedure includes a graft.
Other procedures
Other Procedure codes (20950-20999) report monitoring muscles, bone
grafting with microvascular technique, free osteocutaneous flaps with
microvascular technique, electronic/ultrasound stimulation, and
computer-assisted surgical navigation procedures. 
Monitoring of
interstitial fluid pressure
 (20950) is a procedure in which the
physician inserts a device into the muscle compartment to measure
the pressure changes within the muscle. Increased pressure in the
muscle due to accumulation of fluid causes the blood supply to be
compromised.
Bone grafts
 (20955-20962) are identified by the site from which the
graft is obtained. When the bone grafts are removed, the small blood
vessels remain attached to the graft. The graft is then inserted and the
blood vessels are attached to vessels in the area of implant, using an
operating microscope. The use of the operating microscope (69990) is
included in the code descriptions for 20955-20962. As a reminder,
there is a parenthetical statement following 20962 that states, “(Do not
report 69990 in addition to codes 20955-20962).”
Free osteocutaneous flaps
 (20969-20973) are bone grafts that
include the skin and tissue that overlie the bone. The flap has an
arterial pedicle that is attached (anastomosed) to an artery on the
recipient site. The surgeon then utilizes the skin, tissue, and bone to
reconstruct the defect, using an operating microscope. The codes are
divided based on which part of the body the flap is taken from.
Codes 20955-20962 are vascularized bone grafts that are used where
there are large defects, usually in long bones, where a standard iliac
bone graft or other types of nonvascularized bone grafts are not likely
to heal.
Electrical or ultrasound stimulation
 (20974-20979) is used to
promote healing. Low-voltage electricity or ultrasound is applied to
the skin, and both are often used in the treatment of fractures.
Computer-assisted surgical navigation
 (20985) is the use of
navigational assistance in musculoskeletal procedures. The code is
listed in addition to the code for the primary procedure.
 
From the Trenches
“The most rewarding part of my job is helping others understand a coding or
billing issue, whether they are a patient, employee, physician, or student. I
enjoy teaching and mentoring others.”
MARTHA
Spinal instrumentation and fixation
Within the subheading Spine (Vertebral Column) (22010-22899),
services are often based on the cervical (C1-C7), lumbar (L1-L5), and
thoracic (T1-T12) spinal areas. For example, codes in the range 22210-
22216 identify osteotomy of the cervical, lumbar, or thoracic spinal
area. Codes are often further divided based on the exact spinal
location. For example, codes in the range 22590-22600 identify
arthrodesis of three different cervical areas: occiput-C2, C1-C2, or
cervical below the C2 segment. Of special note in the CPT manual is
that the C1 is often referred to as the 
atlas
 and C2 is referred to as the
axis.
Arthrodesis
 can be performed with another surgical procedure,
such as fracture care or a laminectomy. If arthrodesis is performed
with a more major procedure, use modifier -51 on the arthrodesis code
to indicate multiple procedures were performed. An exception to this
rule is when the code is an add-on code, which is exempt from use
with modifier -51. For example, 22614 is used to report an arthrodesis
of multiple vertebral segments. A code from the 22600-22612 range
reports the first segment, and 22614 is reported for each additional
vertebral segment. Modifier -51 is, therefore, not required.
 
CODING SHOT
When choosing codes for spine procedures, verify whether the code
is describing a vertebral segment, the actual bony segment, versus an
interspace (the space between two vertebral segments). If reporting a
procedure performed at L4-L5, you would choose the primary code
to represent L4 and the add-on code to represent L5. If the procedure
code description was by interspace, only one code would be assigned.
Spinal instrumentation
 is used to stabilize the spinal column in
some repair procedures. 
Segmental instrumentation
 is the
attachment of a fixative device at each end of the area being repaired
and at least one other attachment in the spinal area being repaired
(
Fig. 15-14
). For example, if the repair was at T10 and T11 (thoracic
vertebral bodies 10 and 11) and a rod was attached to T7 and L1, the
repair rod may also be attached at T8, T9, T10, T11, and T12.
Nonsegmental instrumentation
 is the application of the fixative
device at each end of the area being repaired, as illustrated in 
Fig. 15-
15
. For example, if the repair was of T10, the rod may be attached at
T7 and T12.
 
FIGURE 15–14
Decompensated lumbar curve after fusion of thoracic
curve only.
 
FIGURE 15–15
Fixation at each end of the area to be repaired
(nonsegmental spinal instrumentation).
Many of the instrumentation codes are add-on codes (22840-22848
and 22853-22859) and are reported in addition to the major procedure.
Foot and toe repairs
A common procedure performed on the toe is a hallux valgus
correction (bunion surgery). Hallux is the great toe and valgus is the
angulation of the toe away from the midline, as illustrated in 
Fig. 15-
16
.
 
 
FIGURE 15–16
A
 and 
B,
 Hallux valgus, or bunion, is a bursa usually
found along the medial aspect of the big toe. Most commonly, it is
attributed to heredity or to poorly fitting shoes.
A variety of procedures are performed to correct the defect, as
represented by codes in the range 28292-28299. For example, the
Keller type of procedure is reported with 28292 and describes a
procedure in which a wire is inserted through the bones of a toe to
hold the bones in correct alignment. Each code description indicates
the procedure type that is included, many of which include specific
eponyms (names of individuals for whom the procedures are named),
so careful reading is necessary to choose the correct bunion repair
code.
Application of casts and strapping
Application of Casts and Strapping codes (29000-29799) are used for
the initial or subsequent treatment of fractures, ligament sprains/tears,
and overuse injuries. They may also be reported for the initial
stabilization of an injury until definitive restorative treatment can be
provided. Because each injury is unique, each cast is unique in terms
of size and position. The cast immobilizes the fracture with materials
such as plaster, fiberglass, or thermoplastics. Each physician has a
preference for the types of cast materials used.
Strapping
 is the taping of a body part, as illustrated in 
Fig. 15-17
.
Strapping is used to exert pressure on a body part to give it more
stability, and is used in the treatment of sprains, strains, and
dislocations. 
Splints
 are made of wood, cloth, metal, or plastic, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 15-18
, and are used to immobilize, support, or
protect a body part, thereby allowing rest and healing. The 
removal
 of
the cast, strapping, or splint is included in each of the Application of
Casts and Strapping codes.
 
CODING SHOT
If a cast, strapping, or splint is applied as a part of a surgical
procedure, you do not report codes from the Application of Casts and
Strapping subheading because the musculoskeletal surgical
procedure codes include the first cast, strapping, or splint as well as
its later removal. The surgery, application, and removal are all
bundled into the surgical code.
 
FIGURE 15–17
Types of strapping.
 
FIGURE 15–18
Splint used to immobilize a joint or bone.
If the cast, strapping, or splint is applied as a part of a 
fracture
repair,
 the application service is not reported separately. The
application service is bundled into all fracture repair codes, as is the
removal. If a subsequent cast, strapping, or splint is applied within the
follow-up period for either the surgical procedure or the fracture
repair, you can bill the application with modifier -58 and also bill for
the materials (A4580-A4590). You can bill for a separate office visit
during which a second cast, strapping, or splint is applied only if the
patient is provided some additional, separate, and significant service.
Modifier -25 would be appended to the E/M code.
 
QUICK CHECK 15-4
1. 
A replacement cast during the global period of fracture care may
require which modifier? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
You can report the Application of Casts and Strapping codes only
when the physician:
■
 
Applies an initial cast, strapping, or splint for stabilization prior to
definitive treatment by another provider.
■
 
Applies a subsequent cast, strapping, or splint.
■
 
Treats a sprain or fracture and does not expect to provide any other
type of restorative treatment.
The subheading Application of Casts and Strapping is divided into
three major categories:
■
 
Body and Upper Extremity
■
 
Lower Extremity
■
 
Removal or Repair (provided by a physician other than the one who
initially applied it)
The subcategories of Body/Upper Extremity and Lower Extremity
are:
■
 
Casts
■
 
Splints
■
 
Strapping—Any Age
The codes in all subcategories are divided primarily according to
the 
location
 of the cast, splint, or strapping on the body—head, hand,
extremity—and often on the 
type
—Minerva, Velpeau, static
(nonmovable), dynamic (movable).
EXERCISE 15-3
Application of Casts and Strapping
Using the CPT and/or HCPCS manuals, provide the codes for the
following:
1 
Replacement during global period by treating physician of fiberglass
shoulder-to-hand (long-arm) cast for a 54-year-old patient
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
2 
Initial application of a walking-type short leg cast for a sprain
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Removal of a full leg cast by a physician who did not apply the cast
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Strapping of a 46-year-old patient’s knee
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Replacement of a thigh-to-toes cast on the right leg of a 35-year-old
female patient (Initial visit)
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Endoscopy/arthroscopy
Arthroscopy is often the treatment of choice for many orthopedic
surgical procedures. The incisions are smaller, which decreases the
risk of infection and speeds recovery time. Several small incisions are
made through which lights, mirrors, and instruments are inserted, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 15-19
.
 
FIGURE 15–19
Arthroscopy of knee.
The arthroscopy codes are located at the end of the Musculoskeletal
subsection. If multiple procedures are performed through a scope,
they are reported with modifier -51. Bundled into all surgical
arthroscopic procedure codes is the diagnostic arthroscopy. You must
not unbundle and report a diagnostic arthroscopy and a surgical
arthroscopy if both were performed during the same encounter. Do
not report separately services performed during a procedure that are
considered part of the procedure, such as shaving, removing,
evacuating, casting, splinting, or strapping.
A note preceding the Endoscopy/Arthroscopy codes (29800-29999)
states, “When arthroscopy is performed in conjunction with
arthrotomy, add modifier -51.” This note 
indicates that if a surgeon
performs an arthroscopy and during the procedure extends the
procedure to an arthrotomy, both services are reported. For example,
a physician performs an arthroscopic shaving of the articular cartilage
and also performs an open capsulotomy (posterior capsular release) of
the knee. Both the arthroscopic shaving (29877) and the capsulotomy
(27435) would be reported, and to the least expensive procedure add
modifier -51 (multiple procedures).
In arthroscopic procedures, it is also correct to report multiple
procedures in different compartments in the joint area with one code.
For example, in the knee, there are three compartments, the medial,
lateral, and patellofemoral. If a meniscectomy (29881) is performed in
the medial compartment, and a shaving (29877) is performed in the
patellofemoral compartment, only the 29881 is reported as it includes
the shaving.
 
CODING SHOT
When coding arthroscopic procedures of the knee, note the use of
basket forceps,
 which indicates a meniscectomy (meniscus removal)
rather than a shaving and debridement.
The codes in the Arthroscopy subheading are divided according to
body area—elbow, shoulder, knee—and then according to the type
and extent of procedure performed. An example of type of service is
as follows: 29805 reports an arthroscopy of the shoulder for 
diagnostic
purposes, whereas code 29806 is an arthroscopy of the shoulder for a
surgical
 repair procedure. Not only are there two different codes for
surgical and diagnostic arthroscopic procedures, but also the
reimbursement for the surgical procedures is higher than the
diagnostic procedure. So great care must be taken to select the code
that correctly describes the services supported in the medical record
and in code placement. If the procedure began as a diagnostic
procedure, which is often the case, and converts to a surgical
procedure, only the surgical procedure is reported. The
reimbursement for the surgical procedure is higher than the
reimbursement for the diagnostic procedure. For example, one payer’s
reimbursement was $424.86 for the diagnostic procedure (29805) and
$979.21 for the surgical procedure (29806).
 
CODING SHOT
A diagnostic arthroscopy is always included in a surgical
arthroscopy.
Note the description for code 29805: “Arthroscopy, shoulder,
diagnostic, with or without synovial biopsy (separate procedure).”
You will find the statement “separate procedure” several times in the
Endoscopy/Arthroscopy subheading because often a minor
arthroscopic procedure is part of a more major procedure. You cannot
report the service of the minor procedure unless it has been performed
as an independent service, addressing a distinctly separate problem.
Also note that the parenthetical information indicates the codes
“(23065-23066, 23100-23101)” are to be reported if the procedure was
done as an open (incisional) procedure rather than as an endoscopic
procedure.
EXERCISE 15-4
Endoscopy/Arthroscopy
Using the CPT manual, provide the codes for the following:
1 
Surgical arthroscopy of ankle, which included extensive
debridement
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Diagnostic knee arthroscopy with a synovial biopsy
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Diagnostic shoulder arthroscopy
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Arthroscopic repair of tuberosity fracture of knee with manipulation
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Surgical arthroscopy of ankle, including drilling and excision of
tibial defect
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 15, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 All fractures and dislocations are reported based on what?
___________________________________________________
2 The use of internal devices, such as pins, screws, or wires is
considered what type of traction? ________________________
3 The acromioclavicular joint, which is part of the shoulder, is
considered what type of joint when performing arthrocentesis?
______________________________________________________________________________________
4 If the cast, strapping, or splint is applied as a part of a fracture
repair, what is not reported separately? __________________
5 When an esophagoscopy and a lower GI endoscopy are performed
through a scope, what modifier is applied? __________
6 Name the three knee compartments. ______________________
______________________ _______________________
Chapter 15, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, complete the following:
1 The Musculoskeletal System subsection is formatted according to
what type of sites? ________________________________
2 Which physician subspecialty can report the codes from the
Musculoskeletal System subsection? ________________________
a thoracic
b general
c orthopaedic
d any physician
3 The three types of fracture treatments are closed,
___________________, and percutaneous skeletal
___________________.
4 It is the extent or ____________ of the fracture that determines the
method of treatment.
5 ____________ is the application of pulling force to hold a bone in
place.
6 What is the term that describes the physician’s actions of bending,
rotating, pulling, or guiding the bone back into place?
____________________
7 What term is used to mean “put the bone back in place”?
__________________________________
8 A bone that is not in its normal location would be considered
____________________________.
9 What term describes the cleaning of a wound?
__________________________________________
10 This is a hollow needle that is often used to withdraw samples of
fluid from a joint: _________________________________
11 Would a biopsy code usually include the administration of any
necessary local anesthesia? ____________
Chapter 15, part II, practical
With the use of the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, complete the following
(Separate multiple codes with a comma and then a space in your response.
XXXXX, XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier
answers. XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces.
XXXXX x X):
12 Incision of a subfascial soft tissue abscess
CPT Code: ____________________
13 Radical resection of a 2.7 cm sarcoma of the soft tissue of the upper
back
CPT Code: ____________________
14 Closed treatment of three vertebral process fractures, without
manipulation and including bracing
CPT Code: ____________________
15 Under general anesthesia, manipulation of a right shoulder joint
with external fixation
CPT Code: ____________________
16 Lengthening of four tendons of elbow
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
17 Incision and drainage of bursa of elbow
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
18 Open treatment of a carpal scaphoid fracture with internal fixation
applied
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
19 Arthroplasty of two metacarpophalangeal joints
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
20 Tenotomy of two flexor tendons of a finger using an open
procedure
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
21 Amputation, lower arm, using Krukenberg procedure
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
22 Open treatment of radial and ulnar shaft fractures with internal
fixation of both radius and ulna
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
23 Osteoplasty for shortening of both radius and ulna for adult
Kienböck’s disease
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
24 Percutaneous lateral tenotomy for tennis elbow (lateral
epicondylitis)
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
25 Replantation of right arm, including the neck of the humerus
through the elbow joint, following a complete traumatic amputation
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 16
Respiratory system
 
“I really like how my work contributes to higher reimbursement rates
and less denials for the physicians. That in turn always improves
quality of patient care because we have the resources to provide that
based on reimbursement and fewer denials.”
Lynda Kross, CPC
Certified Reimbursement Assistant
 
University Physicians—University of Missouri Health Care
 
Columbia, Missouri
CHAPTER TOPICS
Format
Endoscopy
Nose
Accessory Sinuses
Larynx
Trachea/Bronchi
Lungs and Pleura
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Differentiate between services reported with codes from the
Respiratory System subsection and those reported with codes from
other subsections.
2 
Explain the effects of extent and approach when reporting
endoscopy respiratory procedures.
3 
Identify highlights of nasal procedure coding.
4 
Analyze the codes to report services to the accessory sinuses.
5 
Categorize the codes in the Larynx subheading.
6 
Explain the structure of the trachea/bronchi codes.
7 
Distinguish the difference amongst the codes assigned to report
lungs and pleura services, and procedures.
8 
Demonstrate the ability to code respiratory services and procedures.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Format
The Respiratory System subsection is arranged by anatomic site (e.g.,
nose, accessory sinus, larynx) and then by procedure (e.g., incision,
excision, introduction). Your knowledge of respiratory terminology is
important (
Fig. 16-1
), as you assign codes from the Respiratory System
subsection.
 
FIGURE 16–1
Respiratory system.
In the Musculoskeletal System subsection, arthroscopy codes are
placed at the end of the subsection, but in the Respiratory System
subsection, the 
endoscopy
 codes are listed throughout, according to
anatomic site. 
Fracture repair
, such as that of the nose or sternum, is
listed in the Musculoskeletal System subsection, not in the Respiratory
System subsection. Procedures that are performed on the 
throat
 or
mouth
 are not located in the Respiratory System subsection but
instead are located in the Digestive System subsection.
The Respiratory System subsection contains some codes that may be
considered 
cosmetic
. It is important to note each of the components
performed during the procedure because there are many services
bundled into some of these codes. For example, under the subheading
Nose and the category Repair, there is code 30400 for rhinoplasty. The
rhinoplasty may be performed either through external skin incisions
(open) or through intranasal incisions (closed), and both approaches
can be reported with 30400. The extent of the procedure varies based
on the desired outcome, but a rhinoplasty can include fracturing a
deformed septum, repositioning the septum, reshaping and/or
augmenting the nasal cartilage, removing fat from the area,
performing a layered closure, and applying a splint or cast. If all of
these components of a rhinoplasty were performed, they would be
bundled into 30420. You have to read all of the notes and the code
information carefully to ensure that you do not code components of
the procedure separately if there is one code that includes all the
components.
 
QUICK CHECK 16-1
1. 
Rhinoplasty can be performed either ____________, through
external skin incisions, or closed, through ____________ incisions.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Endoscopy
During endoscopic procedures, a scope is placed through an existing
body orifice (opening), or a small incision is made into a cavity for
scope placement.
When sinus endoscopies are performed, a scope is placed through
the nose into the nasal cavity. Codes for sinus endoscopy (31231-
31294) report unilateral (on one side) procedures except in the case of
a diagnostic nasal endoscopy, which is unilateral or bilateral. Multiple
procedures may be performed within different sinuses (frontal,
maxillary, and ethmoid sinuses) during the same operative session.
The CPT manual has combined into a single code some multiple sinus
procedures commonly performed at the same operative session.
Example
31276
Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical with frontal sinus exploration, with or without removal of tissue from frontal sinus
 
CAUTION 
Code to the full
 
extent
 
of the procedure
.
Endoscopic procedures may start at one site (such as the nose) and
follow through to another site (such as the larynx or bronchial tubes).
It is important to choose the code that most appropriately reflects the
furthest extent of the procedure. For example, if a direct laryngoscopy
is performed, and the scope is progressed past the larynx and includes
examination of the trachea, the service is reported with 31515 because
the code description states either with or without tracheoscopy.
However, if it is necessary to continue the procedure to the bronchial
tubes, the service would be reported with 31622 (bronchoscopy). The
larynx and trachea must be passed to get to the farthest point
(bronchial tubes). In these instances, it is the full extent of the
procedure that determines the code assignment.
 
CAUTION 
Code the correct
 
approach
 
for the procedure.
The same surgical procedure may be performed using different
approaches. For example, code 32141 describes a 
thoracotomy
 with
“resection-plication (removal/shortening) of bullae (blisters); includes
any pleural procedure, when performed.” Code 32655 describes a
surgical 
thoracoscopy
 with resection-plication of bullae, includes any
pleural procedures when performed. Code 32655 describes the same
procedure as 32141, except that 32655 is a procedure performed
through very minute incisions utilizing a thoracoscope, whereas code
32141 describes an open incision through the thorax, opening the full
operative site to the surgeon. In these instances, it is the approach
utilized to perform the procedure that determines the code
assignment.
Multiple endoscopic procedures may be performed through the
same scope during the operative session. When this occurs, each
procedure should be reported with modifier -51 (multiple procedures)
placed on subsequent procedure(s). For example, a bronchoscopy
with biopsy is performed as well as a bronchoscopy with removal of a
foreign body. Not only would you report a bronchoscopy with biopsy,
but you would also report the removal of a foreign body. The multiple
procedure modifier -51 would be placed after the lower priced (least
resource-intensive) procedure. The exception to this occurs when the
CPT manual offers a code for which the description includes all the
separate elements of the procedure bundled into one code.
 
CAUTION 
Do not confuse nasal/sinus endoscopic procedures with intranasal
procedures. Intranasal procedures may require that surgical instruments be
placed into the nose but do not require the use of an endoscope. When an
endoscope is used in a nasal/sinus procedure, assign a nasal/sinus endoscopy
code.
Remember that a diagnostic endoscopy is always bundled into a
surgical endoscopy. For example, if a physician began a diagnostic
endoscopic nasal procedure and continued on to complete a surgical
procedure, you report only for the surgical procedure. To report both
a 
diagnostic and a surgical nasal endoscopy is unbundling if the
diagnostic and surgical procedures are performed on the same nasal
space. However, if a diagnostic sinus endoscopy is performed on the
right maxillary sinus and a surgical endoscopic maxillectomy on the
left, both procedures are reported with appropriate -LT and -RT
modifiers because two different procedures were performed.
When reporting laryngoscopic procedures, note that the terms
“indirect” and “direct” are often stated in the code description. For
example, locate codes 31505, indirect, and 31515, direct in the CPT
manual. 
Indirect
 in 31505 means that the physician used a tongue
depressor to hold the tongue down and view the epiglottis (the lid
that covers the larynx) with a mirror. The patient vocalizes (says “ah”)
and the physician can then view the vocal cords. 
Direct
 in 31515
means that the endoscope is passed into the larynx and the physician
looks directly at the larynx through the endoscope. The operative
report will indicate whether the procedure was indirect or direct.
Locating endoscopy codes. 
Endoscopy codes can be located in the CPT manual index under
“Endoscopy” and then under the anatomic subterm of the site. You
can also locate an endoscopic procedure by the anatomic endoscopy
title. For example, a bronchial biopsy using endoscopy is listed under
“Bronchoscopy” and then under the subterm “Biopsy.”
EXERCISE 16-1
Endoscopy
Using the CPT and manual, complete the following:
1 
Endoscopic maxillary antrostomy
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Direct laryngoscopy for removal of fish bone
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
After the airway is sufficiently anesthetized, a flexible bronchoscope
is inserted through the mouth and advanced to the bronchus, where
a transbronchial biopsy of one lobe is obtained.
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Diagnostic thoracoscopy of the mediastinal space is accomplished
with the use of a flexible endoscope that is inserted through a small
incision on the chest (no biopsy was performed).
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Segmental resection of the right single lung lobe using a flexible
endoscope (surgical thoracoscopy)
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Nose
Many of the codes in the Nose subheading are reported by physicians
who specialize in treating conditions of the nose
(otorhinolaryngologist; ear, nose, and throat specialists), but there are
also many codes in the subheading that are more widely used. For
example, it is in the Nose subheading that you will locate codes for
commonly performed office procedures, such as control of nosebleeds,
incision of abscesses, removal of foreign objects from the nose (think
children!), and removal of nasal cysts and lesions.
Incision
Codes for incision of a nasal abscess (30000, 30020) are divided on
whether the abscess is on the nasal mucosa or the septal mucosa. If a
nasal abscess is approached from the outside of the nose 
(external
approach),
 you would assign a code from the Integumentary System
subsection; but if the approach is from the inside of the nose 
(internal
approach),
 you would assign a code from the Respiratory System
subsection. The medical record will describe the approach to the
procedure.
After an abscess has been penetrated, the physician may close the
area immediately or place a tube in the incision to ensure that the pus
continues to drain from the abscess area. After the drain is removed,
the abscess may be packed with gauze, with one end of the packing
material left outside the surface to act as a wick, as illustrated in 
Fig.
16-2
, 
A
-
C.
 
 
 
FIGURE 16–2
A,
 Nasal mucosal abscess. 
B,
 Incision of abscess. 
C,
Gauze packed into abscess with end extended outside the abscess,
acting as a wick.
The insertion and removal of the tube and/or gauze and any
required sutures and/or anesthesia are bundled into the code, so you
should not report these services separately. You should report any
additional supplies over and above those usually used for the
procedure by using the Medicine section code for supplies, 99070, or a
HCPCS code, as directed by the third-party payer.
Excision
Within the Nose subheading, the Excision category (30100-30160)
contains a wide range of procedures that describe removal of tissue
from the nose—for example, biopsy, polyp excision, and cyst excision
—as well as resection of the turbinate bone.
 
CODING SHOT
When two procedures are completed during the same surgical
session, the most complex procedure is sequenced first.
 
From the Trenches
“When someone expresses an interest in coding, I explain not only what I do
day to day but also why coding is so important. Many people don’t realize
that selecting proper codes is in the patient’s best interest as they can give a
detailed picture of the patient’s medical condition and history.”
LYNDA
The 
biopsy
 code (30100) reports a biopsy that is performed
intranasally; but if the procedure was for a biopsy of the skin outside
of the nose, you assign the biopsy code 11100 from the Integumentary
System.
Nasal polyps develop and mature, causing nasal obstruction (
Fig.
16-3
, 
A
). The physician removes the polyps, usually with a snare, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 16-3
, 
B.
 
 
FIGURE 16–3
A,
 Nasal polyp. 
B,
 A nasal snare is used to remove
nasal polyps. The nose is anesthetized, a snare is slipped around the
polyp, which is transected, and a forceps is used to remove the polyp.
The excision of 
nasal polyps
 is reported with one of two codes
(30110 and 30115). The difference between the codes is the extent of
the excision. Code 30110 reports a simple polyp excision that would
usually be performed in the office, whereas 30115 reports a more
extensive polyp excision that would usually be performed in a
hospital setting.
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -50 (bilateral) is assigned when the polyps are removed
from both the left and right sides of the nose.
The codes for excision or destruction of 
lesions
 inside the nose are
divided based on the approach—internal or external. Usually, if the
approach to the procedure is external, you are referred to the
Integumentary System subsection to locate the correct code; but the
nasal lesion excision/destruction codes can be assigned for either an
external or an internal approach to a lesion.
You have to read the code descriptions carefully to ensure that you
understand all of the circumstances that surround assignment of the
code, and you have to identify codes such as the lesion
excision/destruction that are exceptions to the usual rules.
All methods of lesion destruction, including laser, are included in
the Excision codes. Usually, if laser was used in the destruction of a
lesion, you would be referred to a separate set of codes just for laser
destruction; but with the lesion destruction codes in the Nose
category, laser is included as one of the destruction methods.
Turbinates
 are the bones on the inside of the nose. These bones are
shaped like a spiral shell and humidify, warm, and filter the air. These
bones are referred to as the nasal conchae. The turbinates are divided
into three sections—inferior, middle, and superior (
Fig. 16-4
). Portions
of or all of a turbinate bone may be removed because of chronic
congestion or neoplastic growth. Because third-party payers usually
do not pay for cosmetic surgical procedures, you must document the
medical necessity for noncosmetic procedures carefully to ensure
appropriate reimbursement. Watch for and read the extensive notes
inside the parentheses throughout this category.
 
FIGURE 16–4
Superior, inferior, and middle nasal turbinates.
Introduction
Introduction codes (30200-30220) include injection, displacement
therapy, and insertion. 
Injections
 into the turbinates (30200) are
therapeutic injections usually performed to shrink the nasal tissue to
improve breathing. For example, if a patient has inflamed nasal
passages due to an allergic reaction or a deviated septum, the patient
may benefit from a steroid injection into the turbinates. 
Displacement
therapy
 (30210) is a procedure in which the physician flushes saline
solution into the sinuses to remove mucus or pus. The insertion of a
nasal button
 (30220) (as illustrated in 
Fig. 16-5
) is a technique used for
a 
patient who has a perforated septum. The physician places the
button into the opening and fastens the button in place with sutures.
The button is usually made of silicone or rubber. This technique is
used as a method of repairing the septum without surgical grafting.
 
FIGURE 16–5
Insertion of nasal button.
Removal of a foreign body
A variety of objects are inserted into the various orifices (openings) of
the body, and the nose is a common place into which these foreign
objects are placed. The code to report an office procedure for the
removal of a foreign body from the nose is 30300. Codes for more
extensive procedures are also available for removal of foreign objects
from the nose, such as those requiring general anesthesia (30310) and
a more invasive surgical procedure.
Repair
Within the Repair category (30400-30630) are the plastic procedures—
rhinoplasty, septoplasty, and septal dermatoplasty. 
Rhinoplasty
 is a
procedure to reshape the nose internally, externally, or both. The
codes are divided based on the extent (minor, intermediate, major), on
whether the septum was also repaired (septoplasty), and on whether
the procedure was an initial or secondary procedure. 
Secondary
procedures are those that are performed after an initial procedure. For
example, if a rhinoplasty was performed and the results were not as
successful as the patient desired, the surgeon could perform a second
procedure (secondary) to improve the result.
Septoplasty
 is rearrangement of the nasal septum. This procedure is
commonly performed due to a deviated septum.
 
CAUTION 
Do not use a septoplasty code if the operative report indicates that only a
resection of the inferior turbinate(s) was performed. The resection of the
inferior turbinate(s) is reported with 30140 and is not a procedure performed
on the septum. The septoplasty code, 30520, is reported when the nasal
septum is resected. There is a note enclosed in parentheses following both
codes—30140 and 30520—that cautions you to use the correct code,
depending on whether the turbinate or the septum was resected.
Destruction
Destruction can be accomplished by use of ablation. 
Ablation
 is
removal, usually by cutting, or cauterization is performed to remove
excess nasal mucosa or to reduce inflammation. The destruction codes
(30801, 30802) are divided according to the extent of the procedure—
superficial or intramural. 
Intramural
 is ablation of the deeper mucosa,
as compared to 
superficial
 ablation, which involves only the outer
layer of mucosa.
Other procedures
Codes (30901-30920) for the control of nasal hemorrhage are located in
the Other Procedures category and are often reported. The physician
may use anterior or posterior pressure to control the hemorrhage.
Anterior nasal packing (
Fig. 16-6
) is the application of pressure using
packing to the anterior aspect of the nasal cavity, and posterior nasal
packing is the application of pressure to the posterior aspect of the
nasal cavity. The nasal pack is inserted via the nasal opening. A
balloon may be inserted and inflated to further control bleeding (
Fig.
16-7
). The codes are divided according to the type and extent of
control required.
 
CODING SHOT
The key to correctly coding nasal hemorrhage is to know the type of
control (anterior/posterior) and the level of complexity
(simple/complex) utilized by the physician to control the hemorrhage.
 
FIGURE 16–6
Anterior nasal packing.
 
FIGURE 16–7
Posterior nasal packing.
There are times when neither cauterization nor packing will control
a nasal hemorrhage, and ligation of the bleeding artery is required.
Ligation of ethmoidal arteries involves opening the upper side of the
nose and locating and tying the ethmoid artery (
Fig. 16-8
). Ligation of
the internal maxillary artery is performed to gain control of nasal
hemorrhage by locating and ligating the maxillary artery (
Fig. 16-9
).
 
FIGURE 16–8
Ethmoid artery.
 Source: (Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved. www.netterimages.com)
 
FIGURE 16–9
Maxillary artery.
A 
therapeutic fracture
 of the nasal turbinate is a procedure in
which the physician fractures the turbinate bone and then repositions
it, under local anesthetic. Repositioning the turbinate(s) often
alleviates obstructed airflow caused by enlarged inferior turbinates or
a previous fracture that has healed out of alignment and resulted in a
deviation of the nose.
EXERCISE 16-2
Nose
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, complete the following:
1 
Biopsy of an intranasal lesion
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
2 
Primary rhinoplasty including major septal repair due to deviated
nasal septum, acquired
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Anterior control of nasal hemorrhage by means of limited chemical
cauterization and simple packing
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
Septoplasty with contouring and grafting
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Removal of crayon from nose of 5-year-old boy, conducted as an
office procedure
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Accessory sinuses
Incision
Within the Incision category are codes for services that you would not
think of as being incisional. For example, the nasal sinuses can be
washed (lavage) with a saline solution introduced through a cannula
(hollow tube) to remove infection. The Incision category code 31000
describes lavage of the maxillary sinus. Lavage can be performed on
both the maxillary and the sphenoid sinuses (
Fig. 16-10
). If the lavage
is of the sphenoid sinus, you report 31002.
 
CODING SHOT
Use modifier -50 (bilateral) when the lavage is performed on both the
left and right maxillary sinuses.
 
FIGURE 16–10
Paranasal sinuses.
Many of the codes in the Incision category are for sinusotomies. A
sinusotomy
 is a procedure in which the physician enlarges the
passage or creates a new passage from the nasal cavity into a sinus.
This procedure is usually performed due to chronic sinus infection;
the procedure improves sinus drainage. The codes are divided
according to the extent of the procedure.
EXERCISE 16-3
Accessory Sinuses
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, complete the following:
1 
Lavage of the maxillary sinus, bilateral
CPT Codes: ____________________ and
____________________
2 
Simple left frontal sinusotomy using an external approach
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Unilateral sinusotomy of frontal, ethmoid, and sphenoid
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Right radical maxillary sinusotomy
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Pterygomaxillary fossa surgery, transfacial approach, due to chronic
antritis of maxillary sinus
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________  
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Larynx
The procedures reported with codes in the Larynx subheading (31300-
31599) include a wide range of surgical procedures, such as
laryngectomy, plastic repair, and nerve destruction.
Excision
Laryngotomy
 is an incision that is made over the larynx (thyrotomy)
to expose the larynx to view. With the larynx exposed, the surgeon
can remove a tumor, a laryngocele (air-filled space), or a vocal cord
(cordectomy). A laryngotomy can also be performed for diagnostic
purposes, without a surgical procedure being performed.
Be careful not to get the codes from the Laryngotomy category
confused with the tracheostomy codes located in the Trachea and
Bronchi subheading, Incision category, which you will learn more
about later in this chapter. The codes from the two categories differ,
depending on the 
purpose
 of the procedure. The Laryngotomy
category codes describe procedures in which the surgeon performs a
thyrotomy (incision of the larynx through the thyroid cartilage) for the
purpose of exposing the larynx. The codes in the Trachea and Bronchi
subheading, Incision category, describe a procedure in which the
surgeon performs only the tracheostomy, usually to establish airflow,
and no procedure or exposure of the larynx is planned or is involved.
Radical neck dissection,
 as referred to in the codes for
laryngectomy, is the removal not only of the larynx but also of lymph
glands and/or other surrounding tissue. Many of the codes in the
Larynx subheading, Excision category are divided according to
whether radical neck dissection was or was not performed. The
operative report would indicate the extent of the dissection by
referring to excision of lymph nodes in a radical procedure.
Introduction
Intubation
 is the establishment of an airway. The intubation
represented in 31500 is provided on an emergency basis at such time
as the patient experiences respiratory failure or the 
occurrence of an
inadequate airway. 
Fig. 16-11
 illustrates endotracheal intubation. The
other Introduction code (31502) is for the replacement of a previously
inserted tracheotomy tube.
 
FIGURE 16–11
Endotracheal intubation.
Repair
Within the Repair category are several plastic procedures. A
laryngoplasty for a 
laryngeal web
 is a surgical procedure, usually
performed in two stages, for the repair of congenital webbing between
the vocal cords. The surgeon removes the webbing and places a spacer
between the vocal cords. At a later time, the surgeon will again expose
the vocal cords, using the same tracheostomy incision made on the
initial procedure, and remove the spacer.
EXERCISE 16-4
Larynx
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, complete the following:
1 
Diagnostic laryngotomy
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Laryngoplasty, two stages, for repair of congenital laryngeal web,
removal of spacer
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Emergency establishment of positive airway by means of
endotracheal intubation
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Subtotal supraglottic laryngectomy with removal of adjacent lymph
nodes and tissue due to a primary malignant neoplasm of
glossoepiglottic folds
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
5
 Pharyngolaryngectomy with radical neck dissection for a primary
malignant neoplasm of pharyngeal region
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________  
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Trachea/bronchi
Procedures in the Trachea and Bronchi subheading (31600-31899)
include incisions, introductions, and repairs, in addition to the
endoscopic procedures.
Incision
Tracheostomy
 is the most common procedure reported with codes
from the Incision category. A tracheostomy can be planned or
performed as an emergency procedure. A planned tracheostomy is
usually performed when there is a need for prolonged ventilation
support, beyond the level of support that can be provided by
endotracheal intubation, or when a patient cannot tolerate an
endotracheal tube.
Code 31603 is assigned for an emergency 
transtracheal
tracheostomy, and 31605 is assigned for an emergency 
cricothyroid
membrane tracheostomy. These codes represent two different
approaches to establishing an airway. 
Fig. 16-12
 illustrates the
transverse (across) incision used in a transtracheal approach; it is
made between the cricoid cartilage and the sternal notch. 
Fig. 16-13
illustrates entry into the trachea using the transtracheal approach. 
Fig.
16-14
 illustrates the vertical incision made for a cricothyroid
tracheostomy. 
Fig. 16-15
 shows the entry into the trachea using the
cricothyroid approach.
TOOLBOX 16-1
 
Thomas is scheduled to have a tracheostomy because he continues to
need ventilator support and is unable to tolerate the endotracheal
tube that was inserted yesterday and removed earlier this morning.
 
FIGURE 16–12
Transverse incision used in a transtracheal approach.
 
FIGURE 16–13
Transtracheal entry into the trachea using the
transtracheal approach.
 
FIGURE 16–14
Vertical incision made for a cricothyroid tracheostomy.
 
FIGURE 16–15
Cricothyroid entry into the trachea.
Questions
1. 
Is this a planned or unplanned tracheostomy? ______________
2. 
If the surgeon performs a cricothyroid tracheostomy, a
______________ incision would be made.
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Introduction
Codes in the Introduction category (31717-31730) report services of
catheterization, nasotracheal and tracheobronchial aspirations, and
transtracheal introduction of dilators, stents, or tubes for oxygen
therapy. For an endotracheal intubation, assign 31500 (emergency
endotracheal intubation) rather than a code from the Introduction
category 31717-31730. For tracheal aspiration under direct vision,
assign 31515 from the Endoscopy category.
Code 31720 reports nasotracheal aspiration with a suction catheter
for airway clearance. The procedure involves inserting a catheter into
the nostril and through the trachea. A saline solution may be
introduced to help remove blockage. Report 31725 if a fiberscope is
used and the procedure is performed at the patient’s bedside.
Excision/repair
Excision/Repair procedures (31750-31830) in the Trachea and Bronchi
subheading include plastic repairs, such as tracheoplasty and
bronchoplasty, in addition to the excision of stenosis or of tumors, the
suturing of tracheal wounds, scar revision and closure of a
tracheostomy.
Tracheoplasty
 involves the surgical repair of a damaged trachea.
The repair may involve reconstruction of the trachea by the use of
grafts or splints formed from cartilage taken from other areas of the
body or by the use of prostheses. The codes are divided according to
the approach used (cervical or thoracic) and the extent and type of
repair.
Bronchoplasty
 is repair of the bronchus and often involves the use
of grafting repair or stents. A chest tube may be left in the area as a
drain after the procedure and is not reported separately because it is
bundled into the code to report the procedure. A grafting procedure is
not bundled into the bronchoplasty code 31770 and is reported
separately.
EXERCISE 16-5
Trachea and Bronchi
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, complete the following:
1 
Emergency tracheostomy, cricothyroid approach
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Excision of a tumor of the trachea, cervical
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Catheterization with bronchial brush biopsy (code only the biopsy)
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Planned tracheostomy in 47-year-old patient with acute respiratory
failure
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
5 
Catheterization with bronchial brush biopsy for bronchiolitis, acute
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Lungs and pleura
The Lungs and Pleura subheading (32035-32999) includes a wide
range of codes to report procedures such as thoracentesis,
thoracotomy, and pneumonostomy, in addition to lung transplants
and plastic procedures.
Incision
Thoracotomy
 involves making a surgical incision into the chest wall
and opening the area to the view of the surgeon. This is a major
surgical procedure during which the patient is under general
anesthesia. The codes are divided according to the reason for the
procedure, such as biopsy, control of bleeding, cyst removal, foreign
body removal, or cardiac massage. The insertion of a chest tube is
bundled into the thoracotomy codes.
Excision
The Excision category contains codes for pleurectomy, biopsy,
pneumonocentesis, removal, and reconstructive lung procedures.
Pleurectomy
 is a procedure in which the physician opens the chest
cavity to full view. With the chest open and the ribs spread apart by a
rib spreader, the parietal pleura is removed. The parietal pleura lines
the mediastinum and body walls as illustrated in 
Fig. 16-16
. If a
pleurectomy is performed as part of another, more major procedure
such as the removal of a lung (pneumonectomy), you would not
report the pleurectomy separately. Note that after code 32310,
pleurectomy, parietal “separate procedure” warns you not to report a
pleurectomy if the pleurectomy was performed as a part of a more
major procedure.
 
FIGURE 16–16
Parietal and visceral pleura.
Percutaneous needle lung or mediastinum 
biopsy
 is often
performed under radiologic guidance so that correct placement of the
needle can be ensured. As with the bronchography procedure
described earlier, in the discussion of the Trachea and Bronchi
subheading, if radiologic guidance was used, you report the service
with a code from the Radiology section. There is a note following code
32405 (biopsy) that directs you to the Surgery section, General
subsection, code 10022, when a fine-needle aspiration is performed,
which differs from a tissue biopsy. A fine-needle aspiration is a
procedure in which fluid is withdrawn for examination.
Removal
Pneumonocentesis
 is the withdrawal of fluid from the lung by means
of an aspirating needle. Air or gas in the pleural cavity is known as
pneumothorax and occurs when the lung is traumatically ruptured or
an emphysematous bulla ruptures. When the thoracic cavity
(intrathoracic) air pressure increases, the pressure on the lung can
result in collapse of the lung. The surgeon withdraws the air to allow
the lung to reinflate.
The codes for the removal of the lung are based on how much of the
lung is removed—segmentectomy for one segment, lobectomy for one
lobe, bilobectomy for two lobes, total pneumonectomy for an entire
lung—as well as on the extent of the procedure and the approach.
 
CODING SHOT
If a part of the bronchus was removed or repaired at the same time as
the lobectomy or segmentectomy, report the service with add-on code
32501.
The preferred method of accomplishing a 
thoracentesis
 is by
having the patient sit with arms supported, as illustrated in 
Fig. 16-17
;
local anesthesia is administered, a needle is inserted (
Fig. 16-18
)
between the ribs, and fluid is withdrawn. Thoracentesis is performed
to withdraw fluid from the pleural space that has accumulated as a
result of a variety of conditions, such as congestive heart failure,
pneumonia, tuberculosis, or carcinoma.
 
FIGURE 16–17
Patient position for a thoracentesis.
 
FIGURE 16–18
After administration of local anesthesia, a needle is
inserted between the ribs, and fluid is withdrawn (thoracentesis).
Thoracentesis may also be performed to insert a 
chest tube
 as an
indwelling method of draining the accumulated fluid in the pleural
space (pleural effusion), as illustrated in 
Fig. 16-19
. Local anesthesia is
administered, and a small incision is made through the skin, fat, and
muscle. The hole is then enlarged by using an instrument, and the
tube is inserted into the pleural space. A suture is placed through the
skin and tied to the tube. The tube is then secured with tape. The fluid
is withdrawn by means of a suction device called a multichamber
water-seal suction tube. This therapeutic procedure may be performed
when the patient’s pleural space contains air or gas (pneumothorax),
blood (hemothorax), or a large amount of fluid (pleural effusion).
These conditions can be due to trauma, secondary to another disease
process, or occur spontaneously.
 
From the Trenches
“Certification has made a huge difference in my career. It has allowed me to
move up from the follow-up world of payments and denials to the front-end
world of reviewing documentation and coding.”
LYNDA
 
FIGURE 16–19
A chest tube may be inserted after thoracentesis to
allow for further fluid draining.
Surgical collapse therapy; thoracoplasty
Thoracoplasty
 is a procedure in which a portion of the internal
skeletal support is removed to treat a condition in which pus
chronically collects in the chest cavity (chronic thoracic empyema).
The procedure is major and requires extensive resecting of the
membrane that lines the chest cavity. Gauze is left in the cavity and
after several days is removed. Note that code 32905, thoracoplasty,
refers to “all stages.” The subsequent stages are for the removal of the
packing and are bundled into the surgical code.
Pneumonolysis
 is a procedure that is performed to separate the
inside of the chest cavity from the lung to permit the lung to collapse.
This procedure was originally used as a treatment for tuberculosis but
is now used in the evaluation of pleural diseases, debridement of
chronic emphysema, and as a treatment for emphysematous blebs, in
addition to other therapeutic treatments.
Pneumothorax injection
 (32960) is a therapeutic procedure in
which the surgeon inserts a needle into the pleural cavity and injects
air into the pleural cavity. The pressure in the thoracic cavity is
increased and the lung partially collapses. This procedure is
sometimes performed to treat tuberculosis. A chest tube may be
inserted into the space for further injections of air. You would not
report the insertion of the chest tube separately, as the insertion is
bundled into the procedure code.
EXERCISE 16-6
Lungs and Pleura
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, complete the following:
1 
Thoracotomy for exploration
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Percutaneous needle lung biopsy
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Lobectomy and bronchoplasty performed at same surgical session
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
4 
Resection of an apical malignant lung neoplasm
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
5 
Pneumonostomy with open drainage of abscess (pulmonary
necrosis)
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 16, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 The Respiratory System subsection lists endoscopy codes according
to what criteria? ______________________________
2 Sinus endoscopy codes report unilateral procedures. What type of
endoscopy is reported as unilateral or bilateral?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
3 What subsection is referenced when a procedure on the nose is by
internal approach? _____________________________
4 A surgical operation in which an incision is made in a sinus to
prevent or reduce inflammation is called a(n) ____________.
5 Repair of a laryngeal web is usually performed in
____________________________ _____________________________.
6 This ligament is the larger frontal part of the laryngeal membrane.
_____________________________________________
7 The withdrawal of fluid from lungs by means of an aspirating
needle is called ____________________________________.
8 The pneumonectomy codes are assigned based on this
documentation. _________________________________________
Chapter 16, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, complete the following:
1 The Respiratory System subsection is arranged by
___________________________ site.
2 The procedure in which a scope is placed through a small incision
and into a body cavity is called an ________________ procedure.
3 When coding endoscopic procedures, you must be certain to code to
the fullest ________________ of the procedure and to code the correct
approach for the procedure.
4 If more than one distinct procedure was performed during an
endoscopic procedure, what modifier would you add to the lesser-
priced service? 
(Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier
answer. -XX)
 _________________________
5 What type of endoscopy is always bundled into a surgical
endoscopy? _________________________
6 A(n) ____________ laryngoscopy is performed when a physician
uses a tongue depressor to hold the tongue down and views the
epiglottis with a mirror.
7 A(n) ____________ laryngoscopy is performed when the endoscope
is passed into the larynx and the physician can look at the larynx
through a scope.
8 An otorhinolaryngologist is a physician who specializes in treating
conditions of the ____________, ____________, and ______________.
9 When coding a nasal abscess or a nasal biopsy of the skin using the
external approach, you use codes from the
__________________________ System subsection.
10 When coding a nasal abscess or a nasal biopsy using the internal
approach, you use codes from the ___________________ System
subsection.
11 The three sections of turbinates are inferior, middle, and
_____________________________________________
12 What is the name of the therapy in which the physician flushes
saline solution into the sinuses to remove mucus or pus?
____________________________________________
Chapter 16, part II, practical
With the use of the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following
procedures. Code only the physician services in this exercise; do not code the
laboratory or radiology services. (Separate multiple codes with a comma and
then a space in your response. XXXXX, XXXXX. Make sure to include a
dash in front of your modifier answers. XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate
units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x X)
13 A unilateral, total lung lavage following smoke inhalation
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
14 Performed as a separate procedure, a parietal pleurectomy for
pleurisy with bacterial, nontuberculous effusion
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
15 Resection of apical lung tumor, secondary site malignant neoplasm,
with chest wall resection and reconstruction, unknown primary site
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
16 Removal of a crayon lodged inside nasal passage, office procedure
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
17 Surgical right nasal cavity endoscopy with polypectomy for nasal
polyps
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
18 Direct, operative laryngoscopy for removal of button lodged in 2-
year-old child’s larynx
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
19 Indirect laryngoscopy with biopsy of nodule
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
20 Internal approach used to drain nasal septum hematoma
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
21 External, simple, left frontal sinusotomy for chronic frontal sinusitis
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
22 Surgical sinus endoscopy with sphenoidotomy for acute
sphenoidal sinusitis
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
23 Submucous resection of nose with scoring of cartilage and
contouring for an overdevelopment of nasal bones, acquired
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
24 Jack Rogers developed chest pain and difficulty breathing. He has
also been coughing up thick, blood-tinged sputum. A chest
radiograph shows an ill-defined mass. A diagnostic bronchoscopy of
one lung is performed and a specimen of the endobronchial mass is
taken. While the patient remains hospitalized, the pathology report
comes back 2 days later positive for primary cancer of upper lobe and
a lobectomy is performed.
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
25 James Wilson has been having difficulty breathing and has had
continual chronic ethmoidal sinusitis. Dr. Adams takes James to the
operating room to perform a sinus endoscopy with right anterior and
posterior ethmoidectomy and removal of polyps.
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
26 Mary Bronson has a nosebleed that won’t stop. She goes to the
emergency department, where anterior packing is done to control the
anterior nasal hemorrhage. She also has documented benign
hypertension.
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 17
Cardiovascular system
 
“The world of coding is wide open; coders should explore all available
opportunities and find what most interests them.”
Letitia Patterson, MPA, CPC, CCS-P
Consultant
 
A Coder’s Resource
 
Chicago, Illinois
CHAPTER TOPICS
Coding Highlights
Cardiovascular Coding in the Surgery Section
Cardiovascular Coding in the Medicine Section
Cardiovascular Coding in the Radiology Section
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Understand cardiovascular services reported with codes from the
Surgery, Medicine, and Radiology sections.
2 
Review cardiovascular coding terminology.
3 
Recognize the major differences in the subheadings of the
Cardiovascular subsection.
4 
Define rules of coding cardiovascular services when using codes
from the Medicine section.
5 
Identify the major rules of coding cardiovascular services using the
Radiology section codes.
6 
Demonstrate ability to code Cardiovascular services.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Coding highlights
Cardiology is one of the largest subspecialties in medicine, and
numerous modern techniques are used to diagnose and treat cardiac
conditions. A 
cardiologist
 is an internal medicine physician who is
specialized in the diagnosis and treatment of conditions of the heart.
A cardiologist can further specialize in cardiovascular surgical
procedures or other treatment and diagnostic specialties. In a smaller
practice a cardiologist may do many of these procedures
himself/herself, whereas in a larger practice a cardiologist may be
more specialized and provide a more limited number of services.
Coding from three sections
When you are reporting cardiology services you will often be using
codes from three sections: Surgery, Medicine, and Radiology.
■
 
The Surgery section contains codes for cardiovascular surgical
procedures.
■
 
The Medicine section contains codes for nonsurgical cardiovascular
services.
■
 
The Radiology section contains diagnostic studies or radiologic
visualization codes.
Fig. 17-1
 is a list of the section information that is most often used
when reporting cardiovascular services. The confusion in coding
cardiology usually comes from not understanding the components
(parts) of coding cardiovascular services, the various locations of these
codes in the CPT manual, and the terminology associated with
cardiovascular services. To clarify cardiology coding, let’s begin by
reviewing the definitions of invasive, noninvasive, electrophysiology,
and nuclear cardiology as they relate to cardiovascular coding.
FIGURE 17–1
A list of the section information that is most often used
when reporting cardiovascular services.
Invasive
Invasive
 is entering the body—breaking the skin—to make a
correction or for examination. An example of an invasive cardiac
procedure is the removal of a tumor from the heart. The chest is
opened, the ribs spread apart, the heart fully exposed to the view of
the surgeon, and the tumor removed. Another example is the removal
of a clot from a vessel. The surgeon usually enters the body
percutaneously (through the skin) by means of a catheter that is
threaded through the vessel to the location of the clot. The clot can
then be pulled out of the vessel through the catheter or can be injected
with a substance that dissolves it. Although an open surgical
procedure was not used, the body was entered—an invasive
procedure. Invasive cardiology procedures are also called
interventional
 procedures; some codes are located in the Surgery
section for the surgical technique, and others are located in the
Medicine section and the Radiology section for the radiologic
supervision and guidance, and both codes are reported for the one
procedure. Sometimes, one physician provides both components of
the procedure and in other instances, two physicians will provide the
components.
Noninvasive
Noninvasive
 services and procedures—not breaking the skin—are
usually performed for diagnostic purposes. Usually, performing these
procedures does not require entering the body; rather, they are
diagnostic tests that can be performed from outside the body, for
example, echocardiography (93303-93355) or cardiography (93000-
93278) from the Medicine section.
 
From the Trenches
What qualities best describe a medical coder?
“Detail oriented, investigative and research oriented, patient, and excellent
analytical skills.”
Letitia
 
CODING SHOT
To choose the correct cardiology code, first determine whether the
procedure or service was invasive (interventional [percutaneous] or
open) or noninvasive.
Electrophysiology
Electrophysiology
 (EP) is the study of the electrical system of the
heart and includes the study of arrhythmias. Diagnostic procedures
include procedures such as recordings from inside the heart by
placing wire electrodes into the heart percutaneously and by means of
an electrogram, recording the electrical activity within the heart. The
codes for these invasive diagnostic and therapeutic procedures are
located in the Medicine section (93600-93662).
As a treatment for abnormal electrical activity in the heart, more
invasive treatments can be performed, such as the placement of a
pacemaker, implantable defibrillator, or other devices to regulate the
rhythm of the heart. These invasive treatments are surgical
procedures, and the codes are located in the Surgery section,
Cardiology subsection, Pacemaker or Implantable Defibrillator (33202-
33273). There are also Surgery codes for operative procedures to
correct electrophysiologic problems of the heart (33250-33266), when
the electrical problems are corrected surgically by incision, excision, or
ablation. For example, code 33250 reports an operative ablation
performed for patients with conduction disorders such as Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome, in which there is a short circuit between
the atria and ventricles. This is a congenital defect that results in rapid
heartbeats due to a muscle fiber that remains after the heart
developed. This fiber would usually not be present in the normally
developed heart and when it is present it interrupts normal
conduction. The surgeon ablates the fibers by means of a small wire
that destroys the fibers and restores normal heart rhythm. You will be
learning more about the electrical conduction system of the heart later
in this chapter.
Nuclear cardiology
Nuclear Cardiology
 is a diagnostic specialty that plays a very
important role in modern cardiology. A physician who specializes in
nuclear cardiology uses radioactive radiologic procedures to aid in the
diagnosis of cardiologic conditions. When reporting nuclear
cardiology services, HCPCS Level II codes will often also be reported.
For example, “A” codes report radiopharmaceuticals; “G” codes
report the procedures and procedures combined with the 
supplies,
radiopharmaceuticals, and drugs; “J” codes report the drugs; and “Q”
codes report contrast agents. For example, if the cardiologist provided
a myocardial perfusion imaging, tomography (SPECT) (78452) during
a stress test (93015) with two units A9500 (99mTc sestambi, per study
dose) and 2 mg of adenosine (J0153), you would report: 78452, 93015,
A9500 × 2, and J0153 × 2.
EXERCISE 17-1
Coding Highlights
Complete the following:
1 
This term means entering the body: _____________________
2 
A cardiologist is a(n) _____________________ medicine physician
who has chosen to specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of
conditions of the heart.
3 
What three sections of the CPT will you often use to code cardiology
services? ___________________, _____________________, and
_____________________
4 
What type of cardiology enters the body—breaks the skin—to make
a correction or for examination? _____________________
5 
What is the term that describes the study of the electrical system of
the heart and includes the study of arrhythmias?
_____________________
6 
Physician who specializes in _____________________ cardiology
uses radioactive radiologic procedures to aid in the diagnosis of
cardiologic conditions.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Now that you are familiar with some of the basic terms and coding
of the cardiovascular services and procedures, let’s look at the three
sections where you will locate the components (parts) of
cardiovascular coding: Surgery, Medicine, and Radiology.
Cardiovascular coding in the surgery
section
The Cardiovascular System subsection (33010-37799) of the Surgery
section contains diagnostic and therapeutic procedure codes that are
divided on the basis of whether the procedure was performed on the
heart/pericardium or on arteries/veins. The Heart and Pericardium
subheading (33010-33999) contains codes for procedures that involve
the repair of the heart and coronary vessels, such as placement of
pacemakers, repair of valve disorders, and graft/bypass procedures. In
the Arteries and Veins subheading (34001-37799) are the same types of
procedures but for noncoronary (nonheart) vessels. For example, a
thromboendarterectomy is the removal of a thrombus (stationary
obstruction) and a portion of the lining of an artery. When a
thromboendarterectomy is performed on a coronary artery, you
would assign a code from the Heart and Pericardium subheading; but
if the procedure was performed on a noncoronary artery, you would
assign a code from the Arteries and Veins subheading.
 
CODING SHOT
The location of the procedure—coronary or noncoronary—is the first
step in selecting the correct cardiovascular surgical code, because the
CPT codes are divided on the basis of whether a procedure involved
coronary or noncoronary vessels.
Heart and pericardium
The Surgery section, Cardiovascular System subsection, Heart and
Pericardium subheading (33010-33999) contains procedures that are
performed both percutaneously and through open surgical sites.
There are always many revisions and additions in this subheading
each year to reflect the many advances in this important specialty.
Numerous notes are located throughout the subheading, and they
must be read prior to coding. Codes in the Heart and Pericardium
subheading are for services provided to repair the heart (
Fig. 17-2
),
pericardium or coronary vessels (
Fig. 17-3
). Pericardiocentesis codes
33010 and 33011 are divided based on initial or subsequent service.
 
QUICK CHECK 17-1
1. 
Using 
Fig. 17-3
, name the three main coronary arteries:
________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
FIGURE 17–2
Internal view of heart.
 
FIGURE 17–3
External view of heart.
Pericardium
Pericardiocentesis
 (33010, 33011) is a procedure in which the surgeon
withdraws fluid from the pericardial space by means of a needle
inserted percutaneously into the space as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-4
. The
insertion can be performed using radiologic (ultrasound) guidance—
the use of which would be reported with a separate code from the
Radiology section. There is a note following the pericardiocentesis
codes that states: “(For radiological supervision and interpretation,
use 76930)”; that is, ultrasonic guidance for pericardiocentesis,
imaging supervision, and interpretation. Watch for these directional
features throughout the Cardiovascular System subsection.
 
FIGURE 17–4
Pericardiocentesis is the withdrawal of fluid from the
pericardium by means of aspiration.
The fluid withdrawn during a pericardiocentesis is then examined
for microbial agents (such as tuberculosis), neoplasia, or autoimmune
diseases (such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis). The
pericardiocentesis codes are divided on the basis of whether the
service was initial or subsequent.
A tube pericardiostomy (33015) uses the same procedure described
above, but a catheter is left in the pericardial sac/space leading to the
outside of the body to allow for continued drainage.
The remaining procedures in the Pericardium category (33020-
33050) are open surgical procedures for the removal of clots, foreign
bodies, tumors, cysts, or a portion of the pericardium to create a
window to allow pericardial fluid to drain into the pleural space.
Cardiac tumor
A procedure performed to remove a tumor of the pericardium is
reported using a code from the Pericardium category (33020-33050),
but if a tumor is removed from the heart, you would select a code
from the category Cardiac Tumor (33120, 33130). There are only two
tumor-removal codes in the Cardiac Tumor category, one for a tumor
that is removed from inside 
the heart (intracardiac) and one for a
tumor that is removed from outside the heart (external). Both
procedures are open surgical procedures that involve opening the
chest, spreading the ribs, and excising the tumor.
Transmyocardial revascularization
Laser transmyocardial revascularization describes a procedure in
which areas of cardiac ischemia (reversible muscle damage) are
exposed to a laser beam to create holes in the surface of the heart. This
procedure encourages new capillary growth, thereby revitalizing the
damaged area by increasing the blood flow in the area. This procedure
can be performed alone, as the only surgical procedure performed
(33140), or at the time of another open cardiac procedure (add-on code
33141).
Pacemaker or implantable defibrillator
A pacemaker and implantable defibrillator (33202-33273) are devices
that are inserted into the body to electrically shock the heart into
regular rhythm (as illustrated in 
Figs. 17-5
 and
17-6
). When a
pacemaker is inserted, a pocket is made and a generator and lead(s)
are placed inside the chest (
Fig. 17-7
). Sometimes, only components of
the pacemaker are reinserted, repaired, or replaced. You need to know
three things about the service provided to correctly code the
pacemaker:
1. 
Where the electrode (lead) is placed: atrium, ventricle, or both
ventricle and atrium
2. 
Whether the procedure involves initial placement, replacement,
upgrade or repair of all components or separate components of the
pacemaker
3. 
The approach used to place the pacemaker (epicardial or
transvenous)
 
CODING SHOT
A single pacemaker has one lead (atrium or ventricle), a dual
pacemaker has two leads (one lead in the right atrium and one in the
right ventricle), and a biventricular pacemaker has three leads (one in
the right atrium, one in the right ventricle, and one on the left
ventricle via the coronary sinus vein).
 
FIGURE 17–5
Permanent cardiac pacemaker unit.
 
FIGURE 17–6
Left ventricular pacing.
 
 
 
FIGURE 17–7
A,
 Single pacemaker insertion. 
B,
 Dual chamber
pacemaker. 
C,
 Biventricular pacemaker.
Approaches. 
The two approaches that are used when inserting a pacemaker are
epicardial (on the heart) and transvenous (through a vein), and the
codes are divided according to the surgical approach.
1. 
The 
epicardial
 approach involves opening the chest cavity and
placing a lead on the epicardial sac of the heart. A pocket is formed in
either the upper abdomen or under the clavicle, and the pacemaker
generator is placed into the pocket. The wires are then connected to
the pacemaker generator and the chest area is closed. Codes for the
epicardial process are further divided based on the approach to the
heart—thoracotomy, upper abdominal (xiphoid region), or
endoscopic.
2. 
The 
transvenous
 approach involves accessing a vein (subclavian or
jugular) and inserting an electrode (lead) into the vein. The pacemaker
is affixed by creating a pocket into which the pacemaker generator is
placed. The fluoroscopy views the internal structure by means of x-
rays. Fluoroscopic guidance is included in 33206-33249. Diagnostic
fluoroscopic guidance for diagnostic lead evaluation with lead
insertion, replacement, or revision is reported with 76000.
Transvenous codes are further divided based on the area of the heart
into which the pacemaker is inserted. For example, 33207 (single-lead
pacemaker) is reported for transvenous placement of a pacemaker into
the ventricle of the heart. If the pacemaker electrodes were placed in
both the atrium and ventricle, 33208 (dual-lead pacemaker) is
reported.
The documentation in the medical record will indicate whether a
pacemaker or implantable defibrillator was inserted or replaced.
The same set of criteria applies to choosing the correct implantable
defibrillator codes:
1. 
Revision or replacement of lead(s)
2. 
Replacement, repair, removal of components
3. 
Approach used for insertion or repair
 
CODING SHOT
A change of batteries in a pacemaker or an implantable defibrillator is
a 
removal
 of the implanted generator and the 
reimplantation
(insertion) of a new generator. If only the pulse generator is replaced,
only the appropriate code for the generator removal/insertion is
reported; an additional code for the removal of the generator is not
separately reported.
If electrophysiology (EP) is used to diagnose a condition that
resulted in the insertion of a pacemaker or an implantable
defibrillator, the EP is not included in the surgery code reported for
the insertion. Rather, the EP is reported separately using the Medicine
section codes 93600-93662.
Remember to use modifier -26 on a radiology service when only the
professional portion of the service was provided and -TC when only
the technical portion was provided.
 
CODING SHOT
If a patient with a pacemaker or other implantable device is seen by
the physician within the 90-day follow-up (global) period for
implantation for a problem not related to the implantation, the
service for the new problem can be billed. Documentation in the
medical record must support the statement that the service is
unrelated to the implantation. Append the E/M service code with
modifier -24 (unrelated E/M service). If the patient is returned to the
operating room for repositioning or replacement of the pacemaker or
an implantable defibrillator during the global period by the same
physician, modifier -78 would be appended to the code.
EXERCISE 17-2
Pericardium, Cardiac Tumors, and
Pacemakers
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Allen Jackson gets very tired walking up and down stairs. He has a
hard time catching his breath and experiences instances when his
heart feels as if it is beating fast. His physician has told him that he
will require a pacemaker implantation. Allen goes to surgery and
has a single-lead pacemaker implanted with a ventricular lead.
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Five days after the pacemaker is implanted, Allen (from Question 1)
feels very dizzy and his electrocardiogram is showing some
abnormalities. His physician returns him to the operating room and
discovers that the pacemaker lead is malfunctioning. The
pacemaker lead is replaced, and Allen recovers nicely.
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Five years later, the battery in Allen’s pacemaker is found to have
become depleted. He is also having some other symptoms that his
physician believes necessitate not only a replacement pacemaker,
but also an upgrade to a dual-lead device.
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
A new patient with a chief complaint of sharp, intermittent
retrosternal pain that is reduced by sitting up or leaning forward is
evaluated by a cardiologist. Chest films reveal acute pulmonary
edema with acute pericardial effusion. The physician performs a
pericardiocentesis. (Code the procedure and diagnoses.)
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
____________________
5 
Resection of an endocardium primary malignant tumor in which
cardiopulmonary bypass is required
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Electrophysiologic operative procedures
Electrophysiology, as you learned earlier in this chapter, is the study
of the electrical system of the heart, and most of the codes for the EP
tests are in the Medicine section. The codes in the Surgery section
(33250-33266) apply to the surgical repair of a defect that causes an
abnormal rhythm. Cardiopulmonary bypass is usually required
during these major operative procedures in which the chest is opened
to expose the heart to the full view of the surgeon. Codes 33265 and
33266 are used to report endoscopic approach for EP procedures. The
surgeon maps the locations of the electrodes of the heart and notes the
source of the arrhythmia. The source of the arrhythmia is then ablated
(separated). The codes are divided on the basis of the need for
cardiopulmonary bypass, the reason for the procedure (atrial
fibrillation, atrial flutter, etc.), and the approach. Percutaneous
electrophysiology is discussed later in this chapter under the heading
Intracardiac Electrophysiologic Procedures/Studies.
From the Trenches
 
 
“It is important to be a multi-tasker in the work environment. Also, be as
flexible as possible. Learn the basics of the entire practice if the opportunity
presents itself.”
Letitia
Patient-activated event recorder
A patient-activated event recorder is also known as a cardiac event
recorder or a loop recorder. Codes 33282 and 33284 involve surgical
implantation into the subcutaneous tissue of the upper left quadrant.
The recorder senses the heart’s rhythms, and when the patient presses
a button, the device records the electrical activity of the heart. The
recording can assist the physician in making a diagnosis of a hard-to-
detect rhythm problem. Codes are divided on the basis of whether the
device was implanted or removed.
TOOLBOX 17-1
 
Denise is a busy medical administrator at the local hospital. She has a
very stressful job and has been having heart palpitations, especially in
the late afternoon and evening. Her physician has implanted a
patient-activated event recorder.
Questions
1.
 The electrodes for this monitor are ______________ the body.
2.
 When Denise feels an irregular heartbeat, what is she to do?
______________
3.
 Two other names for this test:
____________________________________________________________
or _____________________________.
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Heart (including valves) and great vessels
The Heart (Including Valves) and Great Vessels category (33300-
33335) contains codes to report the services of repair of cardiac
wounds, exploratory (including foreign body removal), and insertion
of graft of the aorta or great vessels. The codes are reported with or
without cardiopulmonary bypass. Suture repair of the aorta or great
vessels (33320-33322) is reported with or without shunt or
cardiopulmonary bypass.
Cardiac valves
The category Cardiac Valves (33361-33478) has subcategory codes of
aortic, mitral, tricuspid, and pulmonary valves. The procedures listed
are similar for each valve; some are a little more extensive than others.
Code descriptions vary depending on whether a cardiopulmonary
bypass (heart-lung) machine was used during the procedure. The
cardiopulmonary bypass is a resource-intensive procedure that
requires a heart-lung machine to assume the patient’s heart and lung
functions during surgery.
The cardiac valve procedures are located in the CPT manual index
under the valve type or under what was done, such as a repair or a
replacement. For example, the replacement of an aortic valve is
located in the CPT index under “Aorta,” subterm “Valve,” subterm
“Replacement.”
The aortic valve controls the flow of blood from the left ventricle to
the aorta. When a patient has aortic valve stenosis the flow of blood is
restricted. Medications or balloon valve angioplasty are the less
invasive treatments; however, valve replacement may be required.
Codes 33361-33369 report transcatheter aortic valve replacement
(TAVR) and transcatheter aortic valve implant (TAVI). The delivery
catheter is inserted into an artery using a percutaneous, open, or
transaortic approach. Codes 33361-33365 are divided based on the
approach. Codes 33367-33369 are add-on codes that are reported
when the TAVR/TAVI are performed in addition to a more primary
procedure.
EXERCISE 17-3
EP, Event Recorder, and Valves
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Mary Black’s echocardiogram and cardiac catheterization show
severe mitral stenosis with regurgitation. Her physician believes
that because she is symptomatic, she should have her mitral valve
replaced. The mitral valve replacement includes cardiopulmonary
bypass.
CPT Code: ______________________
2 
Andrew Nelson has a loud heart murmur and, after study, is found
to have severe aortic stenosis. He elects to have an aortic valve
replacement. He is taken to the operating room and placed on a
heart-lung machine. He then has his aortic valve replaced with a
prosthetic valve.
CPT Code: ______________________
3 
With the heart exposed through the sternum and the patient’s
functions supported by a cardiopulmonary bypass, the right atrium
is opened and the bigeminal arrhythmia foci are ablated by using
electrical current. Bypass is discontinued and the atrium and
sternum are closed in the usual fashion.
CPT Code: ______________________
ICD-10-CM Code: __________________
4 
Implantation of a patient-activated cardiac loop device with
programming for a diagnosis of palpitations and dizziness.
CPT Code: ______________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: __________________,
__________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Coronary artery anomalies
The Coronary Artery Anomalies category (33500-33507) contains
codes to report the services of repair of the coronary artery by various
methods, such as graft, ligation (tying off), and reconstruction. The
codes include endarterectomy (removal of the inner lining of an
artery) and angioplasty (blood vessel repair). Do not unbundle the
codes and report the endarterectomy or angioplasty separately. Also,
the procedures often require the use of cardiopulmonary bypass to
allow the surgeon to repair the defect while the heart is without blood
flow, which makes a difference in the choice of codes.
Coronary artery bypass
Arteries deliver oxygenated blood to all areas of the body, and veins
return the blood that is full of waste products. The heart muscle is fed
by coronary arteries that encircle the heart. When these arteries clog
with plaque (atherosclerosis) (
Fig. 17-8
), the flow of blood lessens.
Sometimes the arteries clog to the point that the heart muscle begins
to perform at low levels due to lack of blood 
(reversible ischemia)
 or
actually die 
(irreversible ischemia).
 
 
FIGURE 17–8
A,
 Atherosclerosis. 
B,
 Atherosclerotic vessel.
Reversible ischemia means that if the bloodflow is increased to the
heart muscle, the heart muscle may again begin to function at normal
or near-normal levels. 
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
 is one
way to increase the flow of blood (as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-9
). The
diseased portion of the artery is bypassed by attaching a healthy
vessel above and below the diseased area and allowing the healthy
vessel to then become the conduit of the blood, thus bypassing the
blockage (
Fig. 17-10
). Blockage can also be pushed to the sides of the
coronary arterial walls by a procedure in which a balloon is expanded
inside the artery. This procedure is known as a 
percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA)
 
(Fig. 17-11)
 
QUICK CHECK 17-2
1. 
What is the acronym commonly used for coronary artery bypass
graft? ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
).
FIGURE 17–9
Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG).
 
FIGURE 17–10
Coronary artery bypass.
FIGURE 17–11
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.
To correctly report coronary bypass grafts, you must know whether
an artery (33533-33548), a vein (33510-33516), or both (33517-33523,
plus 33533-33548) are being used as the bypass graft. You must also
know how many bypass grafts are being performed. There may be
more than one blockage to be bypassed and, therefore, more than one
graft. If only a vein is used for the graft (most often the saphenous
vein from the leg is harvested and used for this purpose; see 
Fig. 17-
10
), the code reflecting the number of grafts would be assigned from
the category Venous Grafting Only for Coronary Artery Bypass
(33510-33516).
The following exercise will help you understand the differences in
coding for bypass grafts using arteries, veins, or both.
EXERCISE 17-4
Coronary Artery Bypass
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Two coronary bypass grafts using veins only
CPT Code: __________________
The code for Question 1 came from the category Venous Grafting
Only for Coronary Artery Bypass because the bypass was
accomplished using a venous graft. If the bypass had been
accomplished using an arterial graft, the codes in the category
Arterial Grafting for Coronary Artery Bypass would be used to report
the service. If both veins and arteries were used to accomplish the
bypass, you would report the service by reporting an artery bypass
code and a code from the category Combined Arterial-Venous
Grafting for Coronary Bypass. Because the title of the category
contains the words “arterial-venous,” you might think that the codes
in the category report both the artery and the vein, but this is not the
case. The category codes under “arterial-venous” are used only when
a venous graft has been used in addition to an arterial graft, and these
arterial-venous codes are used only in combination with the arterial
graft codes (33533-33536).
For example, a patient has had a 
five-vessel
 coronary artery bypass
graft, for which two bypasses were accomplished using internal
mammary arteries and three bypasses were accomplished using veins
(reported with 2A and 2B):
2A 
Coronary artery bypass using two arterial grafts
CPT Code: ____________________
2B 
Coronary artery bypass using three venous grafts in addition to the
arterial grafts for coronary artery disease, native arteries, due to
arteriosclerotic coronary heart disease
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Coronary artery bypass of native arteries using one internal
mammary artery graft and three venous grafts. Patient has
documented arteriosclerotic coronary heart disease and
hypertensive heart disease, benign.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
CODING SHOT
Modifier -51 would not be assigned with the code for the venous
grafts because codes 33517-33523 are add-on codes. Parenthetical
notations with each code indicate the code is to be used in
conjunction with 33533-33548. This means that the venous code is
never reported alone but always follows an arterial code.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and
extracorporeal life support services
The extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and extracorporeal life
support services are reported with codes 33946-33989. These services
provide cardiac and respiratory support for patients whose heart
and/or lungs are diseased or damaged beyond function.
Arteries and veins
Code groupings for arteries and veins vary according to procedures
such as thrombectomies, aneurysm repairs, bypass grafting, repairs,
angioplasties, and all other procedures. Codes in the subheading
Arteries and Veins (34001-37799) refer to all arteries and veins except
the coronary arteries and veins (
Figs. 17-12
 and 
17-13
).
 
FIGURE 17–12
Arteries of the body.
 
FIGURE 17–13
Veins of the body.
Vascular families—selective or nonselective
placement
A vascular family can be compared to a tree with branches. The tree
has a main trunk from which large branches and then smaller
branches grow. The same is true with vascular families. A main vessel
is the main trunk, and other vessels branch off from the main vessel.
Vessels connected in this manner are considered families.
Catheters, as shown in 
Fig. 17-14
, may have to be placed in vessels
for monitoring, removal of blood, injection of contrast materials, or
infusion. When coding the placement of a catheter it is necessary to
know where the catheter starts and where it ends.
 
FIGURE 17–14
Catheters for arterial cannulation.
Catheter placement is nonselective or selective. 
Nonselective
catheter placement
 means the catheter or needle is placed directly
into an artery or vein (and not manipulated farther along) or is placed
only into the aorta from any approach and not advanced any further.
Selective catheter placement
 means the catheter must be moved,
manipulated, or guided into a part of the venous or arterial system,
passed into a branch of the aorta or access vessel, and then advanced
further through the vessel to enter any of the vascular families (that is,
into the branches), generally under fluoroscopic guidance. The
following codes illustrate nonselective and selective placement:
Code 36000 describes the placement of a needle or catheter into a
vein with no further manipulation or movement. Code 36012
describes the placement of a catheter into a vein and its manipulation
or moving to a second-order vein or farther.
The first note in the Cardiovascular System subsection in the CPT
manual (before code 33010) refers to selective placement. The note
appears at the beginning of the section because it is very important
and applies to the entire Cardiovascular System subsection. When
coding selective placement for any procedure, you report the fullest
extension into one vascular family, just as you would when coding a
gastrointestinal endoscopic procedure, when you report to the farthest
extent of the procedure. The same is true of selective placement into a
vascular family: Code to the farthest extent of the placement within
the vascular family. When a nonselective catheterization is performed,
followed by a selective catheterization, report only the selective
catheterization since the nonselective catheterization would be
included.
The 
first order
 is the main artery in a vascular family, the 
second
order
 is the branch off the main artery, the 
third order
 is the next
branch off the second order, and so on. A vascular family can have
more than one second-order, third-order, and so on, vessel, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 17-15
. Note that the first order in 
Fig. 17-15
 is the
brachiocephalic artery, the second order is the common carotid artery,
and that there are two third-order arteries. If the farthest extent of the
placement was to the third order, only the third-order code would be
reported. For example, if a catheter was placed into the first-order
brachiocephalic artery and from there manipulated through the
second-order artery (right common carotid), and finally into the third-
order artery (right internal or external carotid), you would report only
the third-order artery, with code 36217, which describes an initial
third-order placement within the brachiocephalic family.
Example
Nonselective:
36000 Introduction of needle or intracatheter, vein
Selective:
36012 Selective catheter placement, venous system; second order, or more selective, branch
 
CODING SHOT
Appendix L of the CPT manual is a listing of the vascular families
based on the starting point of the aorta.
 
FIGURE 17–15
Brachiocephalic vascular family with first-, second-,
third-, and fourth-order vessels.
If the catheter placement continued from one branch of the
brachiocephalic family into another branch of the family, you would
report the additional second order, third order, and beyond using an
add-on code—36218. Oftentimes, a physician will investigate not only
one branch of an artery but several others. Report all subsequent
catheter placement to the farthest extent of each placement.
 
CODING SHOT
Code to the farthest extent of the vascular family using an initial code;
then code any additional services of the second order, third order, or
beyond by using an add-on code.
Separate access catheter placement is reported when the physician
performs two or more separate catheterizations. For example, if a
physician were to use an access point to study the artery of the lower
extremity, and then perform a separate catheterization to study the
artery of the upper extremity, Catheter placement codes may vary
according to the vascular family into which the catheter is placed.
Look at the example of the two codes below and note the difference in
vascular families.
Example
36215
Selective catheter placement, arterial system; each first order 
thoracic or brachiocephalic
 branch, within a vascular
family
36245
Selective catheter placement, arterial system; each first order 
abdominal, pelvic, or lower extremity artery
 branch,
within a vascular family
There are times in which modifier -59 (distinct procedural service) is
required when reporting selective and nonselective catheterizations.
For example, let’s say a physician performs a study of the artery of the
lower extremity, third order (reported with 36247), and then performs
a separate, second order study of an artery within the same family
(reported with 36246). Since 36246 is included in code 36247, modifier
-59 is appended to 36246 to indicate it is a distinct procedure.
 
QUICK CHECK 17-3
1. 
Which CPT Appendix would be a helpful resource for selective
vascular coding? ___________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Embolectomy/thrombectomy
An 
embolus
 is a mass of undissolved matter that is present in blood
and is transported by the blood. A 
thrombus
 is a blood clot that
occludes, or shuts off, a vessel. When a thrombus is dislodged, it
becomes an embolus. Thrombectomies or embolectomies are
performed to remove the unwanted debris, or clot, from the vessel
and allow unrestricted bloodflow. A thrombus or embolus may be
removed by opening the vessel and scraping out the debris or by
percutaneously placing a balloon within the vessel to push the
material aside and out of the vessel (see 
Fig. 17-11
). A catheter may
also be used to draw a thrombus or embolus out of the vessel, as
illustrated in 
Fig. 17-16
. Embolectomy/Thrombectomy codes (34001-
34490) are divided based on the artery or vein in which the clot or
thrombus is located (e.g., radial artery, femoropopliteal vein), with the
site of incision specified in the code description (e.g., arm, leg,
abdominal incision). You can locate these codes in the CPT manual
index under “Embolectomy” or “Thrombectomy,” subdivided by
arteries and veins (e.g., carotid artery, axillary vein).
 
FIGURE 17–16
Embolectomy.
When more involved procedures such as grafts are performed,
inflow and outflow establishment is included in the major procedure
codes. This means that if a thrombus is present and a bypass graft is
performed, the removal of the thrombus is bundled into the grafting
procedure if performed on the same vessel. Also bundled into the
aortic procedures is any sympathectomy (interruption of the
sympathetic nervous system) or angiogram (radiographic view of the
blood vessels).
EXERCISE 17-5
Embolectomy/Thrombectomy
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Thrombectomy of the aortoiliac artery, by leg incision
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Embolectomy, carotid artery, by neck incision
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Thrombectomy of venous bypass graft, postop complication, initial
visit
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Vascular repairs
The category Venous Reconstruction (34501-34530) contains codes for
the various repairs made to the vena cava, saphenous vein, and valves
of the femoral vein. The repair to valves is made by opening the site
and clamping off the vessels. The surgeon then opens the vein and
tacks down excess material of the valve with sutures (plication). If
there is a defect in the vein, the surgeon repairs the defect with a graft,
usually harvested from elsewhere in the body. 
Vein repairs
 are
performed by locating the defective vessel, clamping the vessel off,
and bypassing or grafting the defect.
The category Direct Repair of Aneurysm or Excision (Partial or
Total) and Graft Insertion for Aneurysm, Pseudoaneurysm, Ruptured
Aneurysm, and Associated Occlusive Disease (35001-35152) contains
aneurysm repair
 codes that are divided according to the type of
aneurysm and the vessel the aneurysm is located in (subclavian
artery, popliteal artery). The aneurysm is formed by the dilation of the
wall of an artery; it is filled with fluid or clotted blood. During repair,
the aneurysm is located, and clamps are placed above and below it.
The section containing the aneurysm is then removed or bypassed.
The aneurysm codes often refer to a 
pseudoaneurysm
 (false
aneurysm), which is an aneurysm in which the vessel is injured and
the aneurysm is being contained by the tissue that surrounds the
vessel.
Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is a technology that involves
placing a stent graft, a fabric tube, inside the affected area of the blood
vessel accessed through an artery. For example, abdominal aortic
aneurysm repair by endovascular technique is reported with codes
34800-34834, and iliac aneurysm endovascular repair is reported with
34900.
Repair, Arteriovenous Fistula category codes (35180-35190) are
reported for 
fistula repair
 and are divided on the basis of whether the
fistula (abnormal passage) is congenital, acquired, or traumatic. An
arteriovenous fistula occurs when blood flows between an artery and
a vein. An example of an acquired arteriovenous fistula is the creation
of an arteriovenous connection that is used for a hemodialysis site
(
Fig. 17-17
). In repairing a fistula, the surgeon separates the artery and
vein and then patches the area of separation with sutures or a graft.
 
FIGURE 17–17
Hemodialysis.
If an 
angioscopy
 of the vessel or graft area is performed during a
therapeutic procedure, code 35400, Angioscopy (noncoronary vessels
or grafts) during therapeutic intervention, is listed in addition to the
procedure code. For example, the surgeon performed the repair of an
acquired arteriovenous fistula of the neck (35188) and then placed a
scope into the artery to determine visually whether the repair was
complete. Code 35188 describes the primary therapeutic procedure of
repair of the acquired arteriovenous fistula, and 35400 describes the
use of the angioscope to accomplish the repair. Note that 35400 is an
add-on code and cannot be reported alone, but only in conjunction
with another procedure code.
A 
transluminal angioplasty
 is a procedure in which a vessel is
punctured and a catheter is passed into the vessel for the purposes of
widening a narrow or obstructed vessel by inflating a balloon. The
category codes 36902, 36905, 36907, and 37246-37249 are divided on
the basis of whether the catheter was passed into the vessel by incising
the skin to expose the vessel (open) or by passing the catheter through
the skin (percutaneous) into the vessel. Further divisions of the codes
are based on the vessel into which the catheter is placed (e.g., iliac,
aortic).
Bypass grafts
As with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), you must know the
type of grafting material used for vascular bypass grafts (Bypass
Grafts 35500-35671). Grafts can be vessels harvested from other areas
of the body or they may be made of artificial materials. Codes are
chosen on the basis of the type of graft and the specific vessel(s) that
the graft is being bypassed from and to. For example, 35506 describes
a graft that is placed to bypass a portion of the subclavian artery.
During this procedure the surgeon sews a harvested vein to the side
of the carotid artery and attaches the other end of the vein to the
subclavian artery below the damaged area, creating a bypass around
the defect.
 
QUICK CHECK 17-4
1. 
According to the CPT manual notes for bypass grafts, which of the
following procurements is bundled in the bypass?
a. 
upper extremity graft
b. 
composite graft(s)
c. 
saphenous vein graft
d. 
femoropopliteal vein graft
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
One way to locate the graft codes in the CPT manual index is to
reference “Bypass Graft” and then the subterm type (e.g., carotid,
subclavian, vertebral).
Vascular access
Some treatments are administered through the blood by means of
vascular access. For instance, in patients receiving hemodialysis,
arteriovenous fistulas may be created for dialysis treatments (see 
Fig.
17-17
). This means that an artificial connection is made between a vein
and an artery, allowing blood to flow from the vein through the graft
for dialysis (cleansing of waste products) and then be returned to the
artery.
Vascular injection procedures
Bundled into the vascular injections (36000-36522) are the following
items:
■
 
Local anesthesia
■
 
Introduction of needle or catheter
■
 
Injection of contrast media
■
 
Pre-injection care related to procedure
■
 
Post-injection care related to procedure
Vascular injections bundles do not include the following items:
■
 
Catheter
■
 
Drugs
■
 
Contrast media
For items not bundled into the injection procedure, report each item
separately.
 
CAUTION 
Just for a moment, think about what a difference a seemingly small fact—
such as what is included in the vascular injection procedures—makes in the
amount received for the procedure over the course of a year! It is your
responsibility as the coder to know the rules of coding to ensure appropriate
reimbursement for services provided by physicians. Details are important in
the business of coding!
Code 99070 (supplies and materials) from the Medicine section or
HCPCS supply codes report items such as catheters, drugs, and
contrast media if the procedure is performed in the clinic facility. If
the procedure is performed in the hospital catheterization laboratory,
the hospital-based coder would report the supply.
As previously discussed, knowledge of the vascular families is
critical in coding vascular injection procedures because the initial
placement and the extent of placement are usually the characteristics
that determine the codes. You now know that the initial placement of
the 
catheter is reported first and that add-on codes report any
additional services. For example, review the following initial and
additional third-order placement code descriptions in this example:
Example
36217
Selective catheter placement, arterial system; 
initial
 third order or more selective thoracic or brachiocephalic branch,
within a vascular family
36218
Selective catheter placement, arterial system; 
additional
 second order, third order, and beyond, thoracic or
brachiocephalic branch, within a vascular family
In the service described in 36217, the physician inserts a needle
through the skin and into an artery. The needle has a guidewire
attached to it, as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-18
, and when the needle is
withdrawn, the guidewire is left inside the artery. The guidewire can
then be manipulated into the particular artery. Once the guidewire is
in the correct artery, a catheter is threaded into place over the
guidewire and into the first-order brachiocephalic artery. The catheter
is manipulated through the second-order artery and arrives at the
third-order artery, where contrast material is injected into the artery
through the catheter and an arteriography is completed.
 
FIGURE 17–18
Catheter insertion.
After the completion of the service described in 36217, the physician
pulls the catheter back into the second-order artery and then
manipulates the catheter into another third-order artery (36218),
where contrast material is again injected into the artery through the
catheter and another arteriography is completed.
Figs. 17-19
 and 
17-20
 illustrate vascular coding with a common
femoral artery approach.
EXERCISE 17-6
Repairs, Grafts, and Vascular Access
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Bypass graft, with vein; carotid-subclavian
CPT Code: ____________________
FIGURE 17–19
Arterial Head and Neck approach is common femoral.
FIGURE 17–20
Arterial Head and Neck—right external carotid
approach is common femoral.
2 
Bypass graft, with vein; femoral-popliteal
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Bypass graft, using Gore-Tex; axillary-axillary
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Excision, with application of a patch graft, for an aneurysm,
common femoral artery
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
5 
From a right femoral artery approach, the catheter is placed in the
abdominal aorta and is then threaded into the left external iliac
artery where contrast material is injected and angiography is done.
The surgeon then pulls back the catheter into the right external iliac
where contrast is injected and angiography is completed. The
catheter is withdrawn. The patient was diagnosed as having
peripheral vascular disease. 
(Note: Report the catheterization and
radiographic guidance services separately.)
CPT Codes: ____________________ -LT,
______________ -RT, ____________________
(angiography)
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Cardiovascular coding in the medicine
section
Services in the Cardiovascular subsection of the Medicine section
(92920-93799) can be either invasive/noninvasive or
diagnostic/therapeutic. The invasive treatments are not a matter of
cutting open the body so the surgeon can view it, as was the case in
the Cardiovascular subsection of the Surgery section, but are invasive
in that there is an incision into or a puncture of the skin. Review the
subheadings in the Cardiovascular subsection in the Medicine section
of the CPT manual.
Therapeutic services and procedures
It is within the Therapeutic Services and Procedures subheading
(92920-92998) that you locate many commonly assigned
cardiovascular codes, such as cardioversion, infusions, thrombolysis,
placement of catheters and stents, atherectomy, and angioplasty.
Many of these services used to be performed as open operative
procedures, but with the advent of modern techniques, many are now
performed by means of percutaneous access. Division of the codes is
based on 
method
 (balloon, blade), 
location
 (aorta or mitral valve), and
number
 (single or multiple vessels).
Thrombolysis,
 as described in 92975, is a percutaneous procedure
in which the physician inserts a catheter into a coronary vessel and
injects contrast material into the vessel to further enhance the
visualization of a blood clot. The clot is then destroyed by a drug that
the physician injects through the catheter. The Medicine section code
92975 represents the total procedure when the thrombolysis is
performed in a coronary vessel. If vessels other than the coronary
vessels are treated, a code from the Surgery section, Cardiovascular
subsection, would be assigned to report a transcatheter infusion for
thrombolysis (see 37211-37214).
Endoluminal imaging
 of the coronary vessels can be reported using
the two codes 92978 and 92979, depending on the number of vessels
being diagnosed. A needle is inserted percutaneously into the vessel
and a guidewire introduced, followed by an ultrasound probe. The
probe allows a two-dimensional image of the inside of the vessel to be
viewed on the 
ultrasound monitor. The physician can assess the vessel
before and after treatment. The physician may reposition the probe to
assess additional vessels, and 92979 is reported to indicate this
subsequent placement. Note that both 92978 and 92979 are add-on
codes intended to be reported only in conjunction with the primary
procedure. For example, endoluminal imaging with coronary stent
placement would be reported as 92928 (placement of stent) and 92978
(endoluminal imaging).
Intracoronary stent placement
 (92928, 92929) is performed using a
catheter to reinforce a coronary vessel that has collapsed or is blocked.
The placement of the stent is usually accomplished with radiographic
guidance which is included. The codes are divided on the basis of
whether more than one coronary vessel was cleared of obstruction
and had a stent placed within it.
Fig. 17-21
 
illustrates an angioplasty/stent report in which the
coronary artery is repaired by placement of a stent. Percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) is described in codes 92920
and 92921. The codes are divided on the basis of whether a single
vessel or additional vessels are treated during the procedure. Add-on
code 92921 (PTCA for each additional vessel) is of interest because it
can be assigned not only with 92920, but also with other codes in the
category. For example, 92921 can be assigned with 92928, placement
of a stent, when a stent is placed in one vessel and the PTCA is
performed in a different vessel. If a patient had an intracoronary stent
placed in one coronary vessel, report 92928, and if the physician also
performed a PTCA on another coronary vessel, report 92921. This is
the first time that you have used an add-on code with a code other
than the one(s) that appears directly above it in the same group of
codes, so be certain to read the code descriptions for each of the codes
used in the example and pay special attention to the notes that follow
92921.
 
CODING SHOT
There are HCPCS modifiers to identify the specific coronary arteries
that are treated, such as 
-RC,
 right coronary; 
-LC,
 left circumflex; 
-LD,
left anterior descending; and 
-LM,
 left main coronary artery.
 
FIGURE 17–21
Angioplasty/stent report.
Valvuloplasty
 can also be performed by inserting a catheter
percutaneously. The procedure opens a blocked valve by using a
balloon, which is inflated to clear the blockage. Codes 92986-92990 are
divided based on the valve being repaired.
The balloon technique is also used to treat congenital heart defects
such as vessels that are too narrow. A blade can also be deployed
inside the coronary vessels. A special catheter that has a retractable
blade is guided into the vessel and the surgeon manipulates the blade
to enlarge the area, using ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance.
Cardiography and cardiovascular monitoring
services
This category (93000-93278) of the Cardiovascular System subsection
contains frequently assigned codes, such as those for
electrocardiograms and heart monitoring, which are certain to be used
in most office practices, even if the practice does not include a
cardiologist.
The Cardiography subheading codes report electrocardiographic
procedures such as stress tests. 
Stress tests
 are performed to assess the
adequacy of the amount of oxygen getting to the heart muscle (at rest
and during exercise) and thus indicate the presence or absence of
heart disease (
Fig. 17-22
). The top number on a blood pressure reading
is systole (heart muscle is contracting); the bottom number is diastole
(heart muscle is relaxing). The heart muscle is fed by three coronary
arteries and their branches. If these arteries are clear, the amount of
blood going to the muscle is adequate during rest and exercise. The
heart muscle is fed only during diastole. Normal blood pressure is
about 120/80 mm Hg, and the normal heart rate is about 60-100 beats
per minute. During low blood pressure, little blood and oxygen get to
the heart.
 
FIGURE 17–22
Stress test.
As the heart beats faster, such as during exercise, the heart rate
increases and diastolic pressure time decreases, meaning that there is
less time to supply blood to the heart muscle. As the heart beats faster,
more oxygen is required. With narrowing of coronary arteries and
branches, too little blood may circulate to the heart muscle, supplying
even less oxygen than during rest. Chest pain may result as an
indication that heart muscle tissue is dying. Indications of heart
disease during a stress test are chest pain and a depressed or elevated
ST wave segment on the ECG, as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-23
.
FIGURE 17–23
Normal and abnormal ECG test results. 
A,
 Normal
ECG reading. 
B,
 Abnormal ECG reading. The ST segment dips. QRS
complex and T waves are related to the contraction of the ventricles.
Indications of heart disease during a stress test are chest pain and
lengthened ST segments.
The 
Holter
 monitor, as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-24
, is similar to an
electrocardiogram (ECG), as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-25
, in that leads are
attached to the patient. There are portable Holter monitors that record
the patient’s ECG readings for 24 hours. Leads are attached to the
chest and to a cassette machine. The monitor converts the ECG
readings to sound, and the sound is converted back to an ECG reading
when completed. The reading is then sped up to hundreds of times
faster than normal by computers. Any reading that varies from a
normal reading will be identified. The Q, R, and S waves are related to
the contraction of the ventricles of the heart. The QRS waves and
heartbeats can be monitored by Holter monitors. Cardiac arrhythmias
can be identified using the Holter monitor process. An example of a
Holter report is presented in 
Fig. 17-26
 
CODING SHOT
Many CPT monitoring codes cannot be billed with modifiers -TC or
-26, as there are individual codes for the professional and technical
components.
 
FIGURE 17–24
Holter monitor.
 
 
FIGURE 17–25
A
 and 
B,
 Placement of the electrodes for a standard
ECG. The ECG is a visual record of the electrical activity of the heart.
 
FIGURE 17–26
Holter report.
An ECG is typically conducted by attaching 10 electrodes (leads) to
the patient’s chest to monitor 12 areas. The ECG provides a reading of
the electrical currents of the heart and is a standard test conducted to
detect suspected cardiac abnormalities, such as arrhythmias and
conduction abnormalities. Codes report the tracing only (the technical
component), the interpretation and report only (the professional
component), or the entire procedure of tracing and interpretation (the
technical and professional components). The medical record will
indicate the components provided. Codes 93000-93010 are for the
standard 12-lead ECG; the codes are divided on the basis of the
component(s) provided.
Codes 93040-93278 report other various ECGs and are divided
according to the type of recording and the component(s) provided.
Only careful reading will reveal the often slight differences between
codes.
Of special note is 
signal-averaged electrocardiography (SAECG)
reported with 93278. SAECG is a type of electrocardiography that can
help physicians predict certain tendencies to abnormalities such as
ventricular tachycardia. The signal is recorded during nine periods,
each lasting 10 to 20 minutes, and the computer manipulates the data
produced and predicts certain tendencies. The SAECG is a more
sophisticated ECG than the standard ECG and is used when a
standard ECG is unable to demonstrate the suspected conductive
abnormalities.
 
CODING SHOT
If only the interpretation and report are done with an SAECG, report
93278-26 to indicate that only the professional component was
provided.
Telephonic transmission
 of an external patient-activated
electrocardiogram records irregular rhythms. The readings can then
be sent to the physician by means of a telephone to transmit the
information, which is subsequently printed for the physician’s review.
Third-party payers usually restrict the payment of telephonic
transmissions to one every 30 days. The codes 93268-93272 are
divided on the basis of the component(s) that were provided.
A 
cardiovascular stress test
 is used to evaluate and diagnose chest
pain, to screen for heart disease, to evaluate irregular heart rhythms,
and to investigate many other cardiovascular abnormalities. The
patient is placed on a treadmill or a stationary bicycle and ECG leads
are attached. The patient then exercises until he or she reaches
maximal (220 minus age) or submaximal (85% of maximal) heart rate.
During certain intervals, recordings are taken by means of ECG, heart
rate, and blood pressure of the patient.
The codes for stress tests (93015-93018) are divided on the basis of
the components provided. Code 93015 reports the global outpatient
service, and 93016-93018 reports components (parts) of the service.
The ECG is bundled into the stress test, so do not unbundle and report
an ECG or any reading separately. Medication can be administered to
mimic the stressing of the heart and is used when factors are present
that limit a patient’s ability to exercise, such as arthritis, morbid
obesity, or stroke. Stress test codes are used for both stress-induced
(exercise) and pharmacologically induced (drug) studies. Medications
and radiology services may be reported separately.
Implantable and wearable cardiac device
evaluations
Cardiovascular monitoring is a diagnostic service that may be
performed in person or using technology to access cardiovascular
data, and these services are reported with codes in the 93279-93299
range. Codes 93279-93285 are reported per procedure, such as a single,
dual, or multiple lead pacemaker or implantable defibrillator
programming device evaluation. There are extensive notes before the
subheading that are must reading before you begin to assign these
codes.
Codes 93286 and 93287 report periprocedural (shortly before or
shortly after) evaluation of a device based on if the device is a
pacemaker or an implantable defibrillator. The codes may be reported
once before and once after surgery because they are the testing of the
device to ensure it functions correctly.
Codes in the 93288-93292 range are reported per procedure and are
in-person evaluations of a pacemaker or an implantable defibrillator
system based on the type of device and the type of analysis
performed.
Evaluation of a pacemaker by means of a telephone is reported once
in a 90-day period with 93293. The service includes the written report
of the data analysis. Face-to-face evaluations of the device are referred
to as interrogation device evaluations and are reported with 93294-
93299. These codes are divided based on the type of device
(pacemaker or implantable defibrillator) and the time period. For
example, 93297 reports remote interrogation evaluation(s) up to 30
days and 93294 reports remote interrogation evaluation(s) up to 90
days.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography (93303-93355) is a noninvasive diagnostic method
that uses ultrasonographic images to detect the presence of heart
disease or valvular disease. A sliced image is used to detail the
various walls of the heart. A 
transducer
 is placed on the outside of the
chest wall, and it sends sound waves through the chest (
Fig. 17-27
).
 
FIGURE 17–27
Echocardiography. A transducer is placed on the
outside of the chest wall, and it sends sound waves through the chest.
When the heart is in systole, the heart is contracting and the dots on
the echocardiogram appear farther apart. When the heart is in diastole,
it is relaxing and the dots on the echocardiogram appear closer
together.
As the sound reflects back from each organ wall, dots are recorded,
indicating the point of reflection. When the heart is in systole, it is
contracting, and the dots on the recording appear farther apart. When
the heart is in diastole, it is relaxing, and the dots on the recording
appear closer together.
Bundled into the complete echocardiography procedures (93303-
93355) are the obtaining of the signal from the heart and great arteries
by means of two-dimensional imaging and/or Doppler ultrasound, the
interpretation, and the report. Modifiers -26, professional service only,
and -TC, technical component, may be applied to these codes if only
one component is provided. The codes are divided on the basis of
whether it was a complete echocardiogram or a follow-up/limited
study, the type of echocardiogram, and the approach used.
EXERCISE 17-7
Therapeutic Services, Cardiography, and
Echocardiography
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A physician provides CPR to a patient in cardiac arrest.
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Cardiovascular stress test performed in the physician’s office, using
submaximal bicycle exercise with continuous ECG; physician was
in attendance for supervision and provided the interpretation and
report.
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Percutaneous transluminal coronary balloon angioplasty of the right
coronary artery and two vessels of the left anterior descending.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
4 
SAECG with ECG, interpretation and report only. Diagnosis of
unsustained ventricular tachycardia.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Cardiac catheterization
Catheterization (93451-93572) is an invasive diagnostic medical
procedure in which the physician percutaneously inserts a catheter
and manipulates the catheter into coronary vessels and/or the heart.
Fig. 17-28
 illustrates a percutaneous method of catheterization called
the Seldinger technique, after the inventor of the method. This
catheterization is at the right subclavian artery. Following insertion of
the fine-gauge needle, a guidewire and then a catheter are inserted.
The cardiac catheter measures pressure, oxygen, and blood gases,
takes blood samples, and measures the output of the heart. A 
cardiac
catheterization
 is a study of both the circulation and the movement of
the blood of the heart; the physician may inject a dye into the vessel or
heart and observe the movement of the dye by means of angiography.
When injection of contrast material is used to improve visualization,
the injection is bundled into the Cardiac Catheterization code.
 
FIGURE 17–28
Percutaneous method of catheterization (Seldinger
technique).
Component coding requires you to examine services that were
provided to the patient, identify each component, or part, of that
service, identify who performed each component, and code each
service provided. The three cardiac catheterization components of
catheter placement, injection, and imaging are reported in one
combination code. For example, 93456 includes catheterization,
injection, and imaging. However, some cardiac catheterization codes
require multiple codes. For example, 93531 reports catheterization for
congenital cardiac anomalies, but the injection/imaging code
(93563/93564) must be added to completely describe the service
provided. Only careful reading of the code descriptions in the cardiac
catheterization codes will result in correct coding.
If the private physician (such as the clinic physician) performs the
catheterization procedure in the catheterization laboratory at the
hospital, you would add modifier -26 to the cardiac catheterization
code. The hospital would submit charges for the technical component
of the procedure.
 
From the Trenches
“Teamwork is important in this environment.
 
.
 
.
 
. As a profession, we
must be a resource to each other and the health care community as a
whole.”
Letitia
Access for cardiac catheterization can be made in several locations,
depending on the patient’s condition and the physician’s preference—
for example, the right femoral artery (access site).
Cardiac catheterization can indicate valve disorders, abnormal flow
of blood, and a variety of cardiac output abnormalities. Often, a
cardiac catheterization leads to a more definite treatment, such as a
valvuloplasty, stent placement, angioplasty, or bypass.
Bundled into the cardiac catheterization codes are the introduction,
positioning, and repositioning of the catheter(s); the recording of
pressures inside the heart or vessels; the taking of blood samples;
rest/exercise studies; final evaluation; and final report.
Injection codes 93563 and 93564 are only reported with cardiac
catheterization codes 93530-93533, which are codes for cardiac
catheterization for congenital abnormalities. These two injection codes
are divided based on if the procedure was for “coronary
angiography” (93563) or “aortocoronary venous or arterial bypass
graft(s)” (93564). Both codes also include the imaging service. The
codes are listed in addition to the primary cardiac catheter procedure.
There are also other injection codes (93565-93568) and these codes
also include the imaging service. These injection codes are assigned
with cardiac catheterization codes when additional injections are
performed. For example, 93456 reports right heart catheterization with
injections/imaging/angiography. If the physician also performed an
aortography, the code reported for this additional service would be
93567.
There are several codes (93561-93572) in the category. These codes
are for the 
indicator dilution studies,
 which are already bundled into
the cardiac catheterization codes and are to be reported only when the
complete cardiac catheterization procedure was not performed. For
example, if only the dye or thermal dilution study was performed,
without a cardiac catheterization, an indicator dilution study code
would be assigned to report the service.
EXERCISE 17-8
Cardiac Catheterization
Code the following using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals:
1 
Right heart catheterization was performed by means of the
introduction of a cardiac catheter into the venous system, with
further manipulation into the right atrium, including injection into
the right atrium of contrast material, multiple measurements, and
sampling; image supervision was provided by the physician.
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
Left heart catheterization of left ventricle was performed, with
cutdown entry into the brachiocephalic artery, and contrast
medium was injected for left ventricular angiography, including
supervision, interpretation, and report. Diagnosis of coronary artery
disease, native and unstable angina.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: _________________
3 
Indicator dilution studies when done with a cardiac catheterization
are to be billed separately.
True False
4 
Bundled into the cardiac catheterization codes are the positioning
and repositioning of the catheter(s).
True False
5 
Modifier -51 can be added to all codes in the Cardiac Catheterization
subheading.
True False
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Intracoronary brachytherapy
Intracoronary brachytherapy is the use of radioactive substances as a
therapy for in-stent restenosis of a coronary vessel, as illustrated in
Fig. 17-29
. For example, a patient has a coronary artery stent placed to
open a vessel that is blocked with plaque (stenosis). The stent reopens
the vessel so blood can once again flow without obstruction.
However, the stent can also become occluded with plaque and when
this happens, the physician may use intracoronary brachytherapy in
which a radioactive strip of material is inserted by means of a catheter
into the area of blockage, where it is left for up to 45 minutes and then
removed.
 
 
FIGURE 17–29
Brachytherapy delivery systems for coronary artery
stent restenosis. 
A,
 The Novoste Transfer Device uses a saline-filled
syringe to advance the radiation seeds to the treatment site. The same
device is used to remove the seeds at the end of the brachytherapy
treatment. 
B,
 The Novoste delivery catheter advances seeds to the site
of angioplasty.
The procedure would usually be performed by an interventional
cardiologist and a radiation oncologist. The interventional cardiologist
would place the radioactive-element guidewire and report that service
with 92974 (add-on code), which is the catheter placement code. The
radiation oncologist would then place the radioactive elements and
report the services with codes 77770-77772.
Intracardiac electrophysiologic
procedures/studies
As you learned earlier in this chapter, surgical electrophysiologic
procedures (33250-33261) are those that repair the electrical system of
the heart using invasive surgical procedures. In the Medicine section,
the Intracardiac Electrophysiological Procedures/Studies category
(93600-93662) contains codes that describe services that diagnose and
treat the electrical system of the heart using less invasive procedures.
Although the Medicine section procedures are invasive, they are
percutaneous procedures, not open procedures.
Fig. 17-30
 illustrates the electrical conduction system of the heart,
which begins with the sinoatrial node (SA), known as the heart’s
pacemaker. The sinoatrial node sends impulses to the atrioventricular
(AV) node, which in turn passes the impulses to the bundle of His,
and finally on to the Purkinje fibers to stimulate the muscle tissues of
the ventricles of the heart to contract. Lesions or diseases involving
these structures along the electrical conduction pathway underlie
many of the disturbances of cardiac rhythm.
 
FIGURE 17–30
Electrical conduction system of the heart.
To diagnose the origin of an electrophysiologic abnormality, the
physician takes recordings at various sites along the pathway. The
physician may also stimulate the heart to induce arrhythmia by means
of a catheter attached to a pacing device that sends electrical impulses
to various sites within the heart. A protocol (a set order) for the
placement of the catheter is a 
programmed stimulation.
Pacing
 is the regulation of the heart rate. A cardiac pacemaker is a
permanent pacer; but the pacing referred to in the EP codes is a
temporary pacing done in an attempt to stabilize the beating of the
heart. 
Recording
 
is a record of the electrical activity of the heart taken
by means of an ECG. Recording services are reported with codes in
the range of 93600-93603, and pacing services are reported with codes
93610 and 93612. Combination codes that indicate both recording and
pacing begin with 93619. These codes are not used as much as they
used to be when EP was a new technique and readings were
commonly taken at just one site. Today, more complex EP studies are
usually done, including multiple pacings and recordings in
combinations based on established protocols using three or more
catheters. These complex services are reported with codes in the
93619-93622 range. Carefully read the notes in parentheses following
several of the combination codes, as the notes indicate when the use of
the combination code is appropriate and even indicate the codes that
are bundled into the one combination code.
 
CAUTION 
Most of the EP codes have many items bundled into them, so read the
description of each code completely so as to avoid unbundling the services.
Bundle of His recording
 is a reading taken inside the heart
(intracardiac) at the tip of the bundle of His. The bundle of His is also
known as the atrioventricular bundle or AV bundle and is the bundle
of cardiac muscle fibers that conducts electrical impulses that regulate
heartbeats. The physician percutaneously inserts into a vessel a special
catheter that can sense electrical impulses. The catheter is advanced to
the right heart. The femoral vein is the usual site of entry, and
fluoroscopic guidance is usually used for placement of the catheter
into the heart.
Codes 93602 and 93603 describe a single 
recording
 based on the
location—intra-arterial or right ventricle. Codes 93610 and 93612
describe single intra-arterial or intraventricular 
pacing
 in an atrial or a
ventricular location.
Code 93631 reports 
pacing
 and 
mapping
 done during an open
surgical procedure in which the surgeon opens the chest and exposes
the heart. The EP physician performs the mapping (locating the origin
of the arrhythmia and defining the pathway), and the surgeon then
destroys the source of the arrhythmia. When reporting the services of
both physicians for this procedure, use 93631 to report the mapping
service and a surgery code from the range 33250-33261 to report the
arrhythmia ablation. Make a notation next to the mapping code 93631
to report any surgical ablation (33250-33261) to remind yourself to
code both procedures if required. If the mapping is not done
intraoperatively (during surgery), report the service with 93609 or
93613.
Ablation
 can also be performed by using a catheter with a tip that
emits electric current. When the tip is placed on tissue and activated,
the tissue is destroyed. Sometimes physicians destroy certain sites
along the conduction pathway as a treatment for slow (bradycardia)
or fast (tachycardia) heart rhythms. Ablation procedures are reported
according to whether they were at the AV node (93650), a separate
(93655) or an additional treatment (93657).
There are two ways ablation can be performed. The first way does
not require open heart surgery. An area of the patient’s upper thigh is
numbed, but the patient is awake. Then the physician inserts a thin
tube through a blood vessel (usually the femoral vein) and all the way
up to the heart. At the tip of the tube is a small wire that can deliver
radiofrequency
 energy to burn away the abnormal areas of the heart.
Then the heart can beat normally again.
The second way ablation can be performed is by means of open
heart surgery. In the Maze procedure, the surgeon makes small 
cuts
 in
the heart to direct healthy electrical rhythms. In 
cryoablation,
 a very
cold substance is used to freeze the cells that are creating problems. In
endocardial resection,
 the surgeon removes a section of the thin layer
of the heart where the abnormal rhythms originate.
Peripheral arterial disease rehabilitation
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) rehabilitation sessions (93668) last 45
to 60 minutes; these are rehabilitative physical exercises done either
on a motorized treadmill or on a track to build the patient’s
cardiovascular endurance. An exercise physiologist or nurse
supervises the sessions. If a session produces symptoms of angina or
other negative symptoms, the physician reviews the information and
may determine to re-evaluate the patient. The physician services are
not included in the PAD codes, rather the physician services are
reported with an additional Evaluation and Management (E/M) code.
Noninvasive physiologic studies and
procedures
If a patient has a pacemaker or defibrillator in place, periodic
monitoring must occur to ensure that the device is functioning
properly. Codes from the Noninvasive Physiologic Studies and
Procedures (93701-93790) category and the Implantable and Wearable
Cardiac Device Evaluations (93279-93299) category reflect these
services. Codes are assigned according to the type of pacemaker
(single- or dual-chamber) or implantable defibrillator and whether
reprogramming of an existing pacemaker or defibrillator was done.
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
 (93784-93790) is an
outpatient procedure that is conducted over a 24-hour period by
means of a portable device worn by the patient. There is a code for the
total procedure—including recording, analysis, and
interpretation/report—and there are codes for each of the individual
components—recording only, analysis only, and interpretation/report
only.
Other procedures
The Other Procedures codes (93797-93799) report physician services
that are provided for cardiac rehabilitation of outpatients, either with
or without electrocardiographic monitoring.
EXERCISE 17-9
EP and Vascular Studies
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following
physician services:
1 
Bundle of His recording (report professional component only).
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Comprehensive electrophysiologic evaluation was performed,
including recording and pacing of the right atrium and right
ventricle. Three electrodes were repositioned. Left ventricular
recordings were also made, with pacing and induction of
arrhythmia. Diagnosis of vasovagal syncope.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Cardiovascular coding in the radiology
section
The Radiology section of the CPT manual used to contain combination
codes that included both the 
professional
 and 
technical components
in one code. For example, 75659 existed to report the services of both
the angiography (technical component) and the injection procedure
(professional component) in a brachial angiography procedure. When
the complete procedure code, 75659, was deleted, the injection
procedure (professional component) was moved to the Surgery
section and a code to report the technical component (angiography)
remained in the Radiology section. Now, to report both the injection
procedure and the angiography services (the complete procedure), the
coder assigns a Surgery code to report the professional component
and a Radiology code to report the technical component. The division
of the technical and professional components makes it possible to
specify the various parts of a procedure, which is important because
some cardiologists perform both components of these cardiovascular
procedures, and some cardiologists perform only the injection
procedure and have a radiologist do the angiography portion of the
procedure. Component coding allows for the flexibility necessary to
report these various situations. Component coding also makes it
easier to identify the various diagnostic tests used in cardiovascular
conditions. For example, one cardiologist may prefer to use an
ultrasonic procedure in the diagnosis of arterial stenosis and another
may prefer angiography. Both procedures require the insertion of a
catheter and, as such, the insertion code remains the same, but the
diagnostic tools may change.
Radiology codes often contain the statement “supervision and
interpretation.” 
Supervision
 is the radiologist’s overseeing of the
technician who is performing the procedure or indicates that the
radiologist is performing the procedure himself/herself. 
Interpretation
is the summary of the findings, also known as the final report, and the
radiologist or cardiologist may do this portion of the service. There are
actually two components (parts) in a code with supervision and
interpretation in the description—the professional and technical
components. The 
technical component
 is the equipment and the
technician who actually provides the service. The 
professional
component
 is the interpretation of the results and the writing of a
report about the results, as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-31
. Both components
are not necessarily done by the same organization. Let’s take an x-ray
as an example of a service and see how you report the components.
 
FIGURE 17–31
The final radiology report contains the radiologist’s
interpretation of findings.
If a clinic owns its own x-ray equipment and employs a radiologist
to interpret the x-rays and write the reports, and also employs the
technician who, under the supervision of the radiologist, takes the x-
rays, the clinic could report the x-ray service using the appropriate
radiology code, with supervision and interpretation in the description
and no modifier. The clinic provides the total service, also known as
the 
global service.
Another clinic owns the equipment and employs the technician who
takes the x-ray, but then the clinic sends the x-ray out to a radiologist
at another clinic who reads the x-ray and writes the report. The
radiologist would report the service with the appropriate radiology
code and modifier -26 to indicate that he or she provided only the
professional component of the service. The clinic that employs the
technician and owns the equipment would report the same radiology
code but would attach the HCPCS modifier -TC (technical
component) to indicate that only the technical component of the
service was provided.
A third clinic has no x-ray equipment, so the physicians in the clinic
send patients to an outside radiologist who hires the technician who
takes x-rays on equipment owned by the radiologist, the radiologist
interprets the results, and writes the report. The outside radiologist
would report the service using the global radiology code with no
modifier, because both the professional component and the technical
component were provided.
Contrast material
 is commonly used with radiology procedures to
enhance the image. If the Radiology section code states “with
contrast” or “with or without contrast,” you will know that the
injection of contrast material and the contrast material itself (the
substance used for contrasting) are bundled into the code; therefore,
you would not report the contrast material or injection separately. If,
however, there is no indication of contrast in the code description, and
the physician used contrast, you would code both the injection of the
contrast material and the contrast material itself. Injection of contrast
is usually included in the radiology code. If guidelines state that you
should report injections separately, report with the appropriate code
from the Surgery section—for example, 49427, Injection procedure for
evaluation of previously placed peritoneal-venous shunt, and 75809
for the radiology portion of the service. The contrast material is
reported separately using code 99070 from the Medicine section or
with a HCPCS code.
 
CODING SHOT
Not all contrast material can be reported separately! Oral or rectal
contrast is considered a part of the procedure and is not reported
separately. Intravenous, intra-arterial, or intrathecal (fluid-filled space
between the layers of tissue covering the brain and spinal cord)
injection of contrast material can be reported separately if the code
description does not refer to inclusion of contrast material.
STOP 
 
Now, don’t get discouraged with all of these codes from all of these
sections! Remember that only with repeated use of these codes can you
master them. At first, it sounds so confusing that you might wonder if you
can ever absorb all of this information and the variations. You can! But you
must be patient with the process. To be a coder is to be able to concentrate on
details and commit yourself to the process of learning the details through
repeated use. Everyone starts at the same place. Now, let’s get back to
learning about component coding.
Two physicians, a cardiologist and a radiologist from the same
facility, perform an angiography of the brachiocephalic artery (first
order) using contrast material. Access was the right femoral artery.
The coding is as follows:
■
 
Cardiologist placing the catheter: 36215, Surgery section
■
 
Radiologist performing the angiography: 75710, Radiology section
■
 
Supply of the contrast material: 99070, Medicine section, or HCPCS
Level II code (such as A4641, Radiopharmaceutical, diagnostic)
Two physicians, a cardiologist and a radiologist from different
facilities, perform an angiography of the brachiocephalic artery (first
order) using contrast material. The coding for the cardiologist is as
follows:
■
 
Cardiologist placing the catheter: 36215, Surgery section
The coding for the radiologist is as follows:
■
 
Radiologist performing the angiography: 75710, Radiology section
■
 
Supply of the contrast material: 99070, Medicine section, or a
HCPCS Level II code (such as A4641, Radiopharmaceutical,
diagnostic)
 
CODING SHOT
If the radiologist is at the same facility as the equipment, you report
75710 (angiography). If the angiography was performed at the
hospital and the radiologist from a clinic read the angiography, the
radiologist would report 75710-26 and the hospital would report
75710-TC.
Heart
The Heart subsection (75557-75574) of the Radiology section contains
codes that report cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the
heart. An 
MRI
, as illustrated in 
Fig. 17-32
, 
A
 and 
B,
 is the use of
radiation to show the body in a cross-sectional view. MRI may include
the use of injectable dyes (radiographic contrast) to aid in imaging.
Other MRI codes are located throughout the Radiology section
according to the body part being imaged, but the codes in the Heart
subsection are just for cardiac MRIs.
 
 
FIGURE 17–32
A,
 Preoperative MRI of a patient with an ascending
aortic aneurysm. 
B,
 Postoperative MRI of the same ascending aortic
area.
Aorta and arteries
In Radiology, the Aorta and Arteries subsection (75600-75774)
includes codes for aortography excluding the heart—thoracic,
abdominal, cervicocerebral, brachial, external carotid, carotid,
vertebral, spinal, extremity, renal, visceral, adrenal, pelvic,
pulmonary, and internal mammary.
The Aorta and Arteries subsection codes are reported with coding
components of cardiovascular services.
EXERCISE 17-10
Heart, Aorta, and Arteries
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Code a selective catheter placement in the first-order
brachiocephalic artery (also known as the innominate artery) from
the right common femoral artery access point, with angiography,
including contrast done at the clinic catheterization laboratory.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
2 
Bilateral angiography of the arteries of the legs, with radiological
supervision and interpretation (professional component only).
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
CT scan of the heart performed for evaluation of cardiac structure
and morphology, which included assessment of the cardiac function
and evaluation of the venous structures, with contrast material
(professional component only).
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Complete cardiac MRI for morphology and function without
contrast followed by contrast along with four additional sequences
and stress imaging. Diagnosis of congestive heart failure and
premature ventricular contractions.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 17, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 This section of the CPT manual contains codes for nonsurgical
cardiovascular services. ____________________________
2 This procedure describes a percutaneous approach in which the
physician inserts a catheter into a coronary vessel to destroy a blood
clot by a drug.
_________________________________________________________________________
3 Invasive cardiology procedures are also called
___________________________________________________ procedures.
4 The Medicine section of the CPT manual contains the
Cardiovascular subsection; these services are invasive/noninvasive or
________________________________________________/________________________________________________.
5 _______________________ is the term used when a radiologist is
overseeing a technician who is performing a procedure.
6 Cardiac _______ may include the use of injectable dyes to show the
body in a cross-sectional view.
Chapter 17, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, complete the following:
1 What are the two subheadings within the Cardiovascular System
subsection? Heart and ___________________________,
______________________________________________ and
_______________________________________________
2 The subspecialty of internal medicine that is concerned with the
diagnosis and treatment of the heart is _______________.
3 In Chapter 17 you learned about coding from which three sections of
the CPT? (select all that apply) _________________
a Radiology
b Pathology and Laboratory
c Surgery
d Medicine
e Anesthesiology
f Evaluation and Management
4 Procedures that break the skin for correction or examination are
known as ____________________ procedures.
5 Procedures that do not break the skin are known as
__________________ procedures.
6 The study of the heart’s electrical system is known as
___________________________________.
7 The use of radioactive radiologic procedures to aid in the diagnosis
of cardiologic conditions is termed ___________________ (two words)
cardiology.
8 A catheter that is inserted into an artery and manipulated to a
further order is termed _______________________________ placement.
9 A catheter that is inserted into an artery and not manipulated to a
further order is termed _______________________________ placement.
10 Surgical procedures in the Heart and Pericardium subheading
contain procedures that are performed through both open surgical
sites and ____________________________________.
Chapter 17, part II, practical
Code the following cases for the surgical procedures, the office visits, and the
cardiology-related Radiology and Medicine section codes and the diagnoses
codes. Do not code the laboratory work. (Separate multiple codes with a
comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX, XXXXX. Make sure to
include a dash in front of your modifier answers. XXXXX-XX. Make sure to
indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x X)
11 Dennis Smith, a 42-year-old railroad employee (established
patient), has a history of severe mitral stenosis with regurgitation,
rheumatic. He is now symptomatic and his physician recommends a
mitral valve replacement be performed immediately. Dennis agrees to
the surgery, and the physician does a comprehensive history and
physical in preparation for surgery. The physician orders a general
health panel blood workup and a urinalysis (automated). On the next
day, the physician performs a mitral valve replacement. Dennis
recovers uneventfully and is discharged from the hospital 5 days later.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
12 Thrombectomy of arterial graft
CPT Code: ____________________
13 Direct repair of aneurysm and graft insertion for occlusive disease
of the common femoral artery
CPT Code: ____________________
14 A surgical assistant (MD) assists in performing five venous grafts
in a coronary artery bypass procedure for arteriosclerosis of native
arteries.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
15 Open-heart repair of mitral valve with use of cardiopulmonary
bypass
CPT Code: ____________________
16 Removal of a single-lead implantable defibrillator pulse generator
CPT Code: ____________________
17 Pericardiotomy for removal of clot
CPT Code: ____________________
18 Complete repair of tetralogy of Fallot is made with closure of a
ventricular septal defect, and a conduit from the pulmonary artery to
the right ventricle is constructed. A pulmonary graft valve is then
secured.
CPT Code: ____________________
19 Shunting from subclavian to pulmonary artery using the Blalock-
Taussig operation for Fallot’s tetralogy
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
20 Pulmonary endarterectomy with embolectomy requiring
cardiopulmonary bypass
CPT Code: ____________________
21 Direct repair of aneurysm associated with occlusion of the vertebral
artery
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
22 Thromboendarterectomy with patch graft of iliac artery
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 18
Hemic, lymphatic, mediastinum,
and diaphragm
 
“One of the benefits of working in medical coding is to know you’re
making a positive impact on the health care industry. . . . I consider
myself as taking care of the patient by looking out for their best
interest, especially with accuracy in diagnostic coding.”
Sharon J. Oliver, CPC, CPC-I, CPMA
Senior Inpatient Coder
 
East Tennessee State University Physicians & Associates
 
Johnson City, Tennessee
CHAPTER TOPICS
Hemic and Lymphatic Systems
Mediastinum and Diaphragm
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Review the Hemic and Lymphatic Systems subsection format.
2 
Understand the Hemic and Lymphatic Systems subheadings.
3 
Demonstrate the ability to code Hemic and Lymphatic System
services.
4 
Review the format of the Mediastinum and Diaphragm subsection
codes.
5 
Understand the Mediastinum and Diaphragm information.
6 
Demonstrate the ability to code Mediastinum and Diaphragm
services.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Hemic and lymphatic systems
Format
The Hemic and Lymphatic Systems subsection (38100-38999) is
divided into subheadings: Spleen, General, and Lymph Nodes and
Lymphatic Channels (
Fig. 18-1
). Further division is based on type of
procedure (i.e., excision, incision, repair). The codes for spleen and
lymph nodes are located in the CPT manual index under main terms
such as “Spleen,” “Lymph Nodes,” or “Bone Marrow.”
FIGURE 18–1
Lymph nodes and lymph channels.
Coding highlights
Spleen. 
The spleen is composed of lymph tissue and is located in the left
upper quadrant of the abdomen. The spleen is easily ruptured and
may result in massive hemorrhage. The spleen initiates an immune
response, filters, removes bacteria from the bloodstream, and destroys
worn out blood cells. A person can live without a spleen because the
bone marrow, liver, and lymph nodes take over the work of the spleen
after a total removal (splenectomy).
Codes in the subheading Spleen (38100-38200) are further divided
into categories of excision, repair, laparoscopy, and introduction.
Codes in the Excision category are based on the type of splenectomy:
total, partial, or total for extensive disease. The splenectomy (total and
partial) carries the designation “(separate procedure)” behind the
code description (38100, 38101). This means that if the splenectomy is
an integral part of another procedure, it is bundled into the primary
procedure code and not reported separately.
 
CODING SHOT
If a repair of a ruptured spleen was performed and the surgeon
removed only a portion of the spleen, you would report only the
repair code (38115) because removal is bundled into the primary
repair code.
Laparoscopy. 
The surgical laparoscopy codes (38120, 38129) always include a
diagnostic laparoscopy if one is performed. Report a diagnostic
laparoscopy with 49320, Laparoscopy, abdomen, peritoneum, and
omentum, diagnostic, with or without collection of specimen(s) by
brushing or washing (separate procedure).
Introduction. 
A splenoportography is an x-ray of the portal and circulatory vessels
of the spleen. Code 38200 reports the injection portion of the
procedure. The physician makes an incision in the left axilla area and
inserts a catheter into the spleen. Radiopaque dye is inserted and x-
rays are taken. The physician then removes the catheter and closes the
area. The radiological supervision and interpretation portion of the
service is reported with 75810.
General. 
A bone marrow or blood cell transplant is a treatment for some blood
diseases, such as leukemia or lymphoma. During the procedure, the
patient’s bone marrow or blood cells are replaced with healthy
marrow or blood cells from a donor. There are three sources for blood
cell formation: bone marrow, bloodstream, and umbilical cord. Bone
marrow is the inner core of bones that manufactures most blood cells.
Immature blood cells, called stem cells, originate in the marrow of
bones. Leukemia is a malignant disease of the bone marrow in which
excessive white blood cells are produced. Treatment often includes
total-body irradiation or aggressive chemotherapy followed by
transplantation of normal bone marrow. 
Bone marrow aspiration
(38220) is a procedure in which a sample of the bone marrow is taken
by means of a needle that is inserted into the marrow cavity. Marrow
is then aspirated (pulled) through the needle and into the syringe.
Usually the marrow is taken from the iliac crest, pelvic bone, or
sternum. 
Bone marrow biopsy
 (38221) is a procedure in which small
pieces of the marrow are obtained by means of a needle or trocar.
These small chips are then processed in the laboratory by dissolving
the pieces in a decalcification solution. The resulting substance is then
analyzed and the service is reported with a Pathology/Laboratory
code (88305). 
Bone marrow harvesting
 (38230) is a procedure in
which a larger amount of bone marrow is aspirated from a donor by
means of a large aspiration needle. The marrow is then transplanted
into the recipient patient. 
Transplantation and cellular infusions,
38240-38243, are proce
dures in which hematopoietic cells, obtained
from bone marrow, peripheral blood apheresis, or umbilical cord
blood, are infused into the patient. Code 38242 represents allogenic
infusion. The preparation and storage of the cells prior to
transplantation or infusion are reported with 38207-38215. 
Allogenic
is from the same species (human), such as a cadaver, a close relative,
or a non-related donor. 
Autologous
 bone marrow is collected from the
patient, processed, and later transplanted or reinfused into the patient.
Stem cell harvesting
 
QUICK CHECK 18-1
1. 
According to the notes in the CPT, the Bone Marrow/Stem Cell
Services/Procedures (38207-38215) may be reported only once per
day.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
is the collection of stem cells from the blood
system through a process termed apheresis. A
needle is placed into a vein in one arm of the
donor and the blood is removed. The blood is
then filtered to remove the stem cells. The blood,
with the stem cells removed, is returned to the
donor through the other arm. Usually this process
takes 4-6 hours and is usually completed in two
sessions. The harvesting and return of the blood
to the donor (replantation) is reported with codes
38205-38206.
Lymph nodes and lymphatic channels
The lymphatic system is a transportation system that takes interstitial
fluids, proteins, and fats through the lymphatic channels and back to
the bloodstream. Stations along the lymphatic system are called
lymph nodes. The nodes fight disease when lymphocytes from the
nodes produce antibodies. The subheading of Lymph Nodes and
Lymphatic Channels is divided on the basis of the various procedures
(i.e., incision, excision, resection, and introduction). The majority of
the Excision codes (38500-38555) are for biopsy or excision based on
the method (open or needle) and the location (e.g., axillary or
cervical). For the open procedures, the choice of codes depends on
whether the procedure was superficial (38500), deep (38510-38525), or
internal mammary (38530).
Within the Lymph Node and Lymphatic Channels subheading are
two categories of codes for lymphadenectomies that are based on
whether the lymphadenectomy is limited or radical. A 
limited
lymphadenectomy (38562-38564) is the removal of the lymph nodes
only; a 
radical
 lymphadenectomy (38700-38780) is the removal of the
lymph nodes, gland(s), and surrounding tissue. Sometimes, a limited
lymphadenectomy will be bundled into a more major procedure, such
as prostatectomy. If this is the case, you would not report the
lymphadenectomy separately. Rather, you would report only the
more major procedure.
The codes to report a laparoscopic lymph node biopsy or removal
are located in the 38570-38589 range. The codes are divided based on
the extent of the procedure:
■
 
38570 reports retroperitoneal lymph node biopsy, single or multiple.
■
 
38571 reports a bilateral total pelvic lymphadenectomy.
■
 
38572 also reports a bilateral total pelvic lymphadenectomy and
includes the single or multiple biopsy of the periaortic lymph node.
A surgical laparoscopy always includes a diagnostic laparoscopy
and is, therefore, not unbundled and reported separately. If only a
diagnostic laparoscopy is performed, you would report the Digestive
System code 49320.
 
QUICK CHECK 18-2
1. 
Review the Radical Lymphadenectomy codes (38700-38780).
According to the parenthetical statements, what modifier may be
used under appropriate circumstances? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Regions of neck lymph nodes. 
The lymph nodes of the neck are named based on the anatomical
location:
■
 
Submental and submandibular nodes are located at the chin area
and beneath the body of the mandible.
■
 
Upper jugular nodes are divided in two groups and are located at
the mandibular angle and the front of the sternocleidomastoid
muscle.
■
 
Middle jugular nodes are located between the hyoid bone and the
cricoid cartilage.
■
 
Lower jugular nodes are located between the cricoid cartilage and
the clavicle.
■
 
Posterior triangle nodes are divided into two groups.
■
 
Upper visceral nodes are located by the hyoid bone.
■
 
Superior mediastinal nodes are located between the left and right
common carotid arteries.
Refer to 
Fig. 18-2
 for the lymph vessels and nodes of the head and
neck.
FIGURE 18–2
Lymph vessels and nodes of the head and neck.
(Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
www.netterimages.com).
The term “complete neck dissection” in code 38720 is the same as
radical neck dissection. During a complete or radical neck dissection,
the lymph nodes in all five regions are resected (removed). In
addition, the internal jugular vein, spinal accessory nerve, and
sternocleidomastoid muscle are removed. The code is a unilateral
code, so modifier -50 is required if a bilateral procedure is reported. A
modified radical neck dissection as reported with 38724 is the removal
of all lymph nodes that are routinely removed by radical neck
dissection; however, the internal jugular vein, spinal accessory nerve,
and sternocleidomastoid muscle are preserved rather than removed.
The code is a unilateral code, so modifier -50 is required if a bilateral
procedure is reported. The 
suprahyoid neck dissection
 is a variation
of the modified radical neck dissection and is reported with 38700.
A lymphangiogram (38790) is a procedure in which contrast
medium is injected into lymph vessels in the foot, and x-rays are taken
to image the lymph flow. This procedure is often performed for
staging and diagnosis of lymphoma. 
Staging
 is determining the grade
or level of a neoplasm based on a common grading system, such as
the TNM (tumors, nodes, and metastases). A unilateral procedure is
reported with 38790. The radiological supervision and interpretation
portion of the service is reported with codes 75801-75807.
CMS RULES
Sentinel node biopsy may be indicated in breast carcinoma and is
eligible for Medicare reimbursement when the following conditions
are met:
1. 
Clinical Stage I and II carcinoma of the breast with no palpable
lymph nodes in the axilla, and
2. 
If a second sentinel node is excised from a different lymphatic chain
through a separate incision at the same operative session, report the
appropriate CPT code for the second incision and append the -59
modifier.
Examples of payable diagnosis codes: C50.-, C50.029-C50.929
A sentinel lymph node biopsy is bundled into a planned
lymphadenectomy and not paid separately. The injection of dye to
visualize the sentinel node should be reported by the
surgeon/physician who performs the injection with 38792 or 38900 if
the surgeon who is performing the surgical procedure also provided
the injection procedure intraoperatively. This code is reported only
once for the injection of the dye regardless of the number of injections
made around the lesion.
EXERCISE 18-1
Hemic and Lymphatic Systems
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Excision of an axillary cystic hygroma, which the patient medical
record indicates involved no deep neurovascular dissection
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Total removal of the spleen due to Gaucher’s splenomegaly
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Injection procedure for a radiographic view of the portal vein of the
spleen
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Bone marrow transplant, autologous
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Mediastinum and diaphragm
Mediastinum
The mediastinum is the area between the lungs (
Fig. 18-3
). The
Mediastinum subheading of the Mediastinum and Diaphragm
subsection (39000-39599) of the CPT manual is divided by procedures
and includes incision, excision, and endoscopy.
 
FIGURE 18–3
Mediastinum and diaphragm.
Incision. 
The difference between the mediastinotomy codes (39000, 39010) is
the surgical approach. The approach can be either cervical (neck area),
across the thoracic area (transthoracic), or sternum. A mediastinotomy
is performed by making an incision next to the breastbone for the
purposes of exploration, drainage, removal of a foreign body, or
biopsy. You may think removal of a foreign body would be in the
Excision codes, but the Excision codes are only reported for cysts or
tumors.
Excision. 
Excision codes 39200 and 39220 are based on whether a cyst or tumor
was excised. The surgical approach is one in which the surgeon makes
the incision just below the nipple line and retracts the rib cage and
muscles to expose the thoracic cavity. The cyst or tumor is removed
and the incision closed.
If the thyroid gland is removed using an excision into the
mediastinum, the procedure is reported with 60270 from the
Endocrine System subsection and not with an excision code from the
Mediastinum subcategory. Also, if the thymus gland is removed using
a mediastinum approach, you would report the procedure with 60520.
Endoscopy. 
There are two mediastinoscopy codes (39401, 39402), and the
procedure includes any biopsy performed during the procedure. The
procedure is performed by making a small incision above the
sternum. The scope is inserted through the incision for exploration
(and/or biopsy).
Diaphragm
The diaphragm is the wall of muscle that separates the thoracic and
abdominal cavities. The codes in the Diaphragm subheading (39501-
39599) are repair codes. Repairs are usually for a hernia or laceration.
Diaphragm codes are located in the CPT manual index under
“Diaphragm.”
There is one code for imbrication of the diaphragm. An imbrication
of the diaphragm may be performed for eventration, which is when
the diaphragm moves up, usually because of the paralysis of the
diaphragmatic nerve (phrenic nerve). In this case the surgeon sutures
the diaphragm back into place.
EXERCISE 18-2
Mediastinum and Diaphragm
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Exploratory mediastinotomy with biopsy of mediastinal lesion
accomplished with approach through the neck. Pathology report
later indicated primary, malignant neoplasm.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Resection of benign tumor of the mediastinum
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 18, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 The Hemic and Lymphatic Systems subsections include
____________, ___________, and ____________ ____________.
2 What system is considered a transportation system for interstitial
fluids, proteins, and fat? __________________________
3 During a complete neck dissection, the lymph nodes in
____________________________________ regions are removed.
4 The area between the lungs is called the
__________________________________________________________________.
5 The difference between the mediastinotomy codes is the
__________________________ __________________________.
6 The mediastinoscopy code includes any
_______________________________________ performed during the
procedure.
Chapter 18, part I, theory
Complete the following:
1 What is the muscle that separates the thoracic and the abdominal
cavities? ________________________
2 The spleen initiates an immune response, filters and removes
____________ from the bloodstream and destroys worn out blood
cells.
3 Total or partial splenectomy codes are designated in the CPT
manual as ____________ procedures.
4 A marrow or ____________ (two words) transplant is a treatment for
patients with blood diseases, such as leukemia or lymphoma.
5 A bone marrow ____________ is a procedure in which a sample of
bone marrow is taken by means of a needle that is inserted into the
marrow cavity.
6 A(n) ____________ bone marrow comes from a close relative.
7 A(n) ____________ bone marrow comes from the patient, is
processed, and later transplanted or reinfused.
8 A(n) ____________ lymphadenectomy is the removal of the lymph
nodes only.
9 The Mediastinum category of codes is based on the
_________________ (two words) taken to perform the
mediastinotomy.
10 Another name for the diaphragmatic nerve is the ____________
nerve.
Chapter 18, part II, practical
Code the following cases (Separate multiple codes with a comma and then a
space in your response. XXXXX, XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in
front of your modifier answers. XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units
with an x and spaces. XXXXX x X):
11 Using a cervical approach, ligation of the thoracic duct was
accomplished.
CPT Code: ____________________
12 Surgical laparoscopy with bilateral total pelvic lymphadenectomy
CPT Code: ____________________
13 Superficial inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy with pelvic
lymphadenectomy, including the external iliac, hypogastric, and
obturator nodes
CPT Code: ____________________
14 Diaphragmatic resection of a secondary, malignant lesion that
included extensive use of prosthetic material. The primary
malignancy was located in the uterus, which has been previously
removed, followed by a course of radiation and chemotherapy with
no further evidence of existence.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ____________, ____________
15 Excisional biopsy of superficial lymph nodes of the neck by means
of an open procedure for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
16 Dissection of the deep jugular nodes, diagnosis of thyroid gland
primary cancer
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
17 Excision of congenital cervical cystic hygroma with dissection of
deep neurovascularity
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
18 Limited lymphadenectomy for staging of para-aortic lymph nodes
in malignant primary prostate cancer
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
19 Bilateral injection procedure for lymphangiography of axillary
node enlargement, left side
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
20 Mediastinoscopy with biopsy for mediastinal mass
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 19
Digestive system
 
“I love not doing the same thing each day, and I love looking at
different things and mastering them. And that’s what coding is!”
Belinda D. Inabinet, CPC, CCC, CMC
Coding Coordinator SC Heart Center
 
Columbia, South Carolina
CHAPTER TOPICS
Format
Lips
Vestibule of Mouth
Tongue and Floor of Mouth
Dentoalveolar Structures
Palate and Uvula
Salivary Gland and Ducts
Pharynx, Adenoids, and Tonsils
Esophagus
Stomach
Intestines (Except Rectum)
Meckel’s Diverticulum and the Mesentery
Appendix
Colon and Rectum
Anus
Liver
Biliary Tract
Pancreas
Abdomen, Peritoneum, and Omentum
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Understand the format of the Digestive System subsection.
2 
Report procedures of the lips.
3 
Report procedures of the vestibule of the mouth.
4 
Report procedures of the tongue and floor of the mouth.
5 
Report procedures of the dentoalveolar structures.
6 
Report procedures of the palate and uvula.
7 
Report procedures of the salivary gland and ducts.
8 
Report procedures of the pharynx, adenoids, and tonsils.
9 
Report procedures of the esophagus.
10 
Report procedures of the stomach.
11 
Report procedures of the intestines (except rectum).
12 
Report procedures of the Meckel’s diverticulum and mesentery.
13 
Report procedures of the appendix.
14 
Report procedures of the colon and rectum.
15 
Report procedures of the anus.
16 
Report procedures of the liver.
17 
Report procedures of the biliary tract.
18 
Report procedures of the pancreas.
19 
Report procedures of the abdomen, peritoneum, and omentum.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Format
The format of the Digestive System subsection (40490-49999) is
divided according to anatomic site (
Fig. 19-1
) and procedure. Included
in this subsection are codes for sites beginning with the mouth and
ending with the anus. Also included are those internal organs that aid
in the digestive process, including the pancreas, liver, and gallbladder.
 
FIGURE 19–1
Digestive system.
This subsection includes codes for procedures of the abdomen,
peritoneum, omentum, and hernia repairs. Endoscopic codes are
located throughout the subsection on the basis of the anatomic site.
Lips
Codes in the Lips subheading (40490-40799) include the categories of
Excision, Repair (Cheiloplasty), and Other Procedures. If the
procedure was performed on the skin of the lips, assign a code from
the Integumentary System, not a Digestive System code.
A 
vermilionectomy
 (40500) is shaving of the lip. The vermilion
zone is the red part of the lips (
Fig. 19-2
). The surgeon removes an
area of tissue and repairs the defect by moving the mucosal surface to
reconnect the lip, thereby forming a new vermilion border. If the area
of defect is larger, a more extensive excisional procedure may be
necessary (40510-40527). For example, during a 
transverse wedge
excision
 (40510), a wedge of lip tissue is removed and tissue flaps are
placed to repair the defect. Code 40525 describes a full-thickness lip
excision with reconstruction with local flap. There are many services
bundled into 40525, such as:
■
 
11440-11444 and 11446 (benign lesion excision)
■
 
11640-11644 and 11646 (malignant lesion excision)
■
 
40500 (vermilionectomy with mucosal advancement)
■
 
40510 and 40520 (excision of lip)
 
FIGURE 19–2
Vermilion border.
The 
Abbe-Estlander
 (40527, also known as Abbe flap or cross flap)
is a reconstructive procedure in which a graft is taken from a portion
of the lip and the non-defective area above the lip is used to repair the
area of defect. For example, a patient had cancer of the lower lip due
to smoking, as illustrated in 
Fig. 19-3
, 
A
. The surgeon removed the
area of defect from the lower lip and identified a superior (above lip)
flap. In 
Fig. 19-3
, 
B,
 the superior flap was moved to cover the area of
defect. 
Fig. 19-3
, 
C,
 illustrates the results of the 
reconstruction
. If more
than one-fourth of the lip surface is removed, the procedure is
considered a 
resection
 and is reported with 40530. If reconstruction of
the lip is required to repair the defect that remains after the resection,
the procedure is reported separately with a code from 13131-13153
(complex repair of lip and face). The reconstruction code is assigned
based on location and size of the defect.
 
QUICK CHECK 19-1
1. 
An Abbe-Estlander flap is also known as an Abbe or _____________
flap.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
 
 
 
FIGURE 19–3
A,
 Abbe-Estlander flap for lip reconstruction with
defective area excised and flap area outlined. 
B,
 Abbe-Estlander flap
for lip reconstruction with flap moved down and positioned in defect
area. 
C,
 Completed Abbe-Estlander flap.
The codes for 
cheiloplasty
 (lip repair) are located in the Repair
category. There are two types of Repair codes: those that report full-
thickness repair of the lip (40650-40654) and those that report cleft lip
repair (40700-40761). The full-thickness repairs are based on the extent
of the repair, for example, vermilion only (40650), up to half of the
vertical height of the lip (40652), and over one-half of the vertical
height of the lip (40654, complex repair).
A 
cleft lip
 is a congenital defect in which the muscle and tissue of
the lip did not close properly. 
Fig. 19-4
, 
B,
 illustrates a unilateral defect
and 
Fig. 19-4
, 
C,
 illustrates a bilateral defect. Some of the cleft lip
Repair codes report bilateral procedures (40701, 40702) and other
codes report unilateral procedures (40700, 40720). If a bilateral
procedure was performed and the code description does not indicate
a bilateral procedure, add modifier -50.
 
 
 
FIGURE 19–4
A,
 Cleft palate. 
B,
 Unilateral cleft lip. Note the nasal
deformity in which the nose is out of normal position. 
C,
 Bilateral cleft
lip.
A 
rhinoplasty
 may be required if a nasal deformity has occurred
with the cleft lip defect. These defects occur when the muscle, rather
than encircling the mouth, attaches to the nose and pulls the nose out
of normal position. If a rhinoplasty is performed with a cleft lip repair,
the rhinoplasty is reported separately with 30460 or 30462. 
A cleft
palate (
Fig. 19-4
, 
A
) may also be present with a cleft lip, and if repair
of the palate is performed at the time of the lip repair, the palate repair
is reported separately with codes from the 42200 series. For example,
42205 reports a palatoplasty for a cleft palate with closure of the soft
tissue of the alveolar ridge.
Vestibule of mouth
The vestibule of the mouth is also known as the buccal cavity and is
part of the oral cavity. Codes for the Vestibule of Mouth (40800-40899)
do not include codes for services of the Tongue and Floor of Mouth
(41000-41599) or Dentoalveolar Structures (41800-41899). The
categories included within the Vestibule of Mouth subheading are
incisions (e.g., abscess, cyst, or hematoma), excision/destruction (e.g.,
biopsy or lesion excision), and repair (e.g., closure or vestibuloplasty).
The procedures are based on the complexity of the procedure (e.g.,
simple or complex) and whether the procedure is bilateral or
unilateral.
Tongue and floor of mouth
The Tongue and Floor of Mouth subheading (41000-41599) includes
codes to report the incision and drainage of abscess, cyst, or
hematoma of the tongue or floor of the mouth. These 
incision and
drainage codes (41000-41009) are based on the location of the abscess,
cyst, or hematoma, such as under the tongue 
(sublingual)
, under the
mandible 
(submandibular)
, or within the space from the floor of the
mouth to the hyoid bone 
(masticator space)
. The sublingual codes are
further based on whether the abscess, cyst, or hematoma is superficial
or deep.
The 
lingual frenum
 is the flap of skin under the tongue.
Ankyloglossia
 (tongue tie) is illustrated in 
Fig. 19-5
 and is due to a
tight lingual frenum. This condition is often diagnosed by the
pediatrician during a newborn examination. Ankyloglossia occurs in
4.8% of the population and may interfere with feeding. The procedure
in which an incision is made in this flap is a frenotomy. The incision
procedure (41010) frees the tongue to allow greater motion. During a
frenotomy, the lingual frenum is only incised, not excised. If a
frenectomy (excision of the lingual frenum) is performed, the service
is reported with 41115 from the Excision category. If the lingual
frenum is surgically repaired (frenoplasty), the procedure is reported
with 41520 from the Other Procedures category.
 
FIGURE 19–5
Ankyloglossia.
Extraoral incision and drainage (I&D) is performed on an abscess,
cyst, or hematoma located outside the mouth or on the floor of the
mouth. Code range 41015-41018 reports extraoral (outside the mouth)
incision and drainage based on the location of sublingual, submental
(under the chin), submandibular, or masticator space. The masticator
space is a deep facial space, bounded by the superficial layer of deep
cervical fascia and containing the four muscles of mastication, ramus,
and posterior body of the mandible.
Excision
 codes (41100-41155) report oral biopsies, excision of oral
lesions, and removal of all or part of the tongue (glossectomy). The
biopsy codes (41100-41108) are reported based on the location from
which the biopsy was obtained. The codes for excision of a lesion are
also based on the location (such as floor of mouth, tongue, or lingual
frenum). If a local tongue flap is required to repair the excisional
defect, report the repair with 41114 in addition to the code for the
primary excision procedure.
Repair
 (41250-41252) of the tongue is reported based on the size of
the repair:
■
 
2.5 cm or less
■
 
Over 2.6 cm
In addition to the size, the tongue repair codes are also based on the
location of the repair:
■
 
Floor of the mouth and/or anterior two thirds of tongue
■
 
Posterior one third of tongue
If the length of the repair is stated in inches, the measurement must
be converted to centimeters. One inch equals 2.54 cm, and the formula
for conversion is:
■
 
Centimeters × 0.3937008 = inches
■
 
Inches × 2.54 = centimeters
If the repair is stated in millimeters (mm) the conversion to
centimeters is:
■
 
1 millimeter = 0.1 centimeters
For example, if the medical record indicated 15 millimeters, the
calculation would be 15 × 0.1 = 1.5 centimeters.
Dentoalveolar structures
The dentoalveolar structures are the bone (osseous) and soft
structures of the mouth that anchor the teeth (
Fig. 19-6
). Codes 41800-
41899 report incision, excision/destruction, and other types of
procedures performed on the dentoalveolar structures. Examples of
these procedures include drainage of an abscess, cyst, or hematoma
(41800) or excision of a lesion with simple repair (41826). Some of the
codes are based on the quadrant in which the procedure is performed,
such as excision of the gingiva (gingivectomy), reported with 41820
for each quadrant or, as another example, excision of the alveolar
mucosa, reported with 41828 for each quadrant.
 
FIGURE 19–6
Alveolar mucosa.
The American Dental Association (ADA) publishes a dental claim
form that is most often used to report dental services.
CMS RULES
For current information on the dental coverage for Medicare patients,
refer to the Internet Only Manuals (IOM)
(
www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/Internet-Only-Manuals-IOMs.html
)
100-01, 
Chapter 5
, Section 70.2 and 100-02, 
Chapter 15
, Section 150.
Palate and uvula
Services to the palate (roof of mouth) and uvula (pendulous structure
at the back of the throat) are reported with codes 42000-42299. This
subheading contains the usual codes for incision, excision/destruction,
and repair. If grafting is required to repair the area of defect after
excision of a lesion, the grafting service is reported in addition to the
excision code. The choice of grafting codes is based on whether a skin
graft (14040-14302) or an oral mucosal graft (40818) was used for
repair. Within the Repair codes you will also locate the codes to report
repair procedures for cleft palate (42200-42225), as discussed
previously.
Code 42145 describes a palatopharyngoplasty (palate and pharynx
repair) procedure and has limited medically indicated reasons for the
surgical procedure. One medically indicated reason for the procedure
is obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) that is documented to be
unresponsive to conservative measures, such as continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP), positional therapy, dental devices, and
weight loss. OSA is characterized by frequent episodes of hypopnea
(shallow breathing) or apnea during sleep.
Salivary gland and ducts
There are three salivary glands as illustrated in 
Fig. 19-7
 (parotid,
submandibular, and sublingual). It is important to note the technique
for performing biopsy procedures of the salivary glands. Code 42400
states the biopsy of the salivary gland using a needle technique, and
42405 uses an incisional approach. There is an injection procedure that
is reported with 42550 for a sialography (x-ray of salivary gland), and
the radiological component of the procedure is reported with 70390. It
is important to read all notes before or after a code description
because the parenthetical statement in the CPT manual located after
42550 directs the coder to report the radiological supervision and
interpretation with 70390. Imaging guidance may be used for salivary
gland biopsy (42400) and is reported in addition to the biopsy service
depending on the guidance type—77002 (fluoroscopic), 77012 (CT),
77021 (MRI), or 76942 (ultrasound).
 
FIGURE 19–7
Salivary glands.
The codes in this subheading (42300-42699) are often divided based
on the gland. For example, excision of a tumor of the parotid gland is
reported with 42410; of the submandibular gland, 42440; and of the
sublingual gland, 42450. Other services are reported based on the
number of glands involved. The parotid duct is a duct opening from
the cheek into the vestibule of the mouth opposite the neck of the
upper second molar tooth as illustrated in 
Fig. 19-8
. The parotid duct
is also known as the Steno’s or Stensen’s duct. When a gland is excised
with the parotid duct diversion, the service for both the diversion and
excision of two submandibular glands are reported with 42509.
 
FIGURE 19–8
Parotid gland and duct (Stensen’s) with the surrounding
branches of the facial nerve. Line B approximates the course of the
duct, which enters the mouth at the junction of lines A and B.
EXERCISE 19-1
Lips, Vestibule of Mouth, Tongue and
Floor of Mouth, Dentoalveolar Structures,
Palate and Uvula, and Salivary Gland and
Ducts
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, complete the following:
1 
A ___________________________ is shaving of the lip.
2 
In addition to the sites from the mouth to the anus, the Digestive
System codes include codes for the pancreas, liver, and
____________________.
3 
How many centimeters are there in 4 inches (round to the nearest
tenth)? _____________
4 
An Abbe-Estlander reconstruction for cleft lip
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
5 
A complex, full-thickness repair of the vermilion after resection of
buccal-mucosal squamous cell carcinoma of upper lip
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
Simple drainage of a hematoma of the vestibule of the mouth
CPT Code: ____________________
7 
Repair of a laceration of the tongue, measuring 1.5 inches
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Pharynx, adenoids, and tonsils
It is within the 42700-42999 range of codes that you will locate the
often reported codes for tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. In
addition there are codes for incisions, biopsies, excisions, and repair
procedures.
The Incision category (42700-42725) codes report the drainage of an
abscess. The codes are assigned based on the 
location
 (peritonsillar
[around the tonsil], retropharyngeal [behind the pharynx],
parapharyngeal [adjacent to the pharynx]) of the abscess and the
approach
 utilized (intraoral or external). Careful reading of the
operative report is necessary to identify the location and approach to
ensure correct code assignment.
Biopsy
 codes 42800-42806 include obtaining the biopsy sample but
do not include the use of a scope to obtain the sample. If a
laryngoscopic biopsy is performed, the service is reported with a code
from the Respiratory System, not with a code from the Digestive
System. For example, 31510 (indirect diagnostic, views through
reflection with a mirror), 31535 (direct operative, views with a scope),
or 31536 (direct operative, views direct with scope, plus operating
microscope assistance).
A 
branchial cleft
 cyst is a congenital defect that appears as a gill
located on the neck. Branchia is Greek for gills, which the cyst
resembles. Reporting an excision of the branchial cleft cyst is based on
the extent of the procedure. If the extent of the defect was confined to
the skin and subcutaneous tissue, report the service with 42810. If the
defect extended beneath the subcutaneous tissue and perhaps into the
pharynx, report the service with 42815.
Tonsillectomy
 and 
adenoidectomy
 are commonly reported surgical
procedures (42820-42836). The tonsils are two glands located at the
back of the throat (
Fig. 19-9
, 
A
), and the adenoids (
Fig. 19-9
, 
B
) are
located behind the nose and above the soft palate 
(roof of mouth) and
cannot be visualized without a mirror or scope. The selection of the
correct code is based on if:
■
 
Only the tonsils are removed
■
 
Only the adenoids are removed
■
 
Both the tonsils and adenoids are removed
■
 
The patient is under 12 years of age, or age 12 or over
 
 
FIGURE 19–9
A,
 Tonsils. 
B,
 Adenoid.
 
FIGURE 19–10
Cervical and thoracic approaches for removal of a
foreign body from the esophagus.
Many codes contain age descriptors or primary (initial removal) or
secondary (subsequent removal of tissue that has grown back).
 
CODING SHOT
The codes for tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy in the range
42820-42836 are performed bilaterally. If a procedure is reported with
the -50 modifier, or with modifiers -RT and -LT, the third-party payer
will usually not recognize the modifier(s) and will pay based on the
amount for a single procedure. If only one side is removed, modifier
-52 (Reduced service) must be appended to the CPT code.
A 
pharyngoplasty
 (42950) is the surgical repair of the pharynx and
includes the use of flaps fashioned from the skin, tongue, and/or
tissue located near the area of defect (regional cutaneous flaps) used in
the repair procedure. If a pharyngeal flap is used, report the service
with 42225, as directed in the parenthetical note.
A 
pharyngostomy
 (42955) is a procedure to create an opening for
insertion of a long-term feeding tube. An incision is made below the
jaw line on the skin and the incision is carried down to the pharynx.
The opening is reinforced with sutures, and a long-term feeding tube
is inserted through the opening into the pharynx. A nasogastric
feeding tube (NGT, nose to stomach) is a more well-known method,
but in some patients (i.e., severe facial trauma), pharyngostomy is the
necessary approach.
Codes to report the control of oropharyngeal (between the soft
palate and the epiglottis) or nasopharyngeal (above the soft palate)
hemorrhage are located in the Other Procedures subheading (42955-
42999). Codes 42960-42972 (esophagotomy or myotomy) are reported
based on whether the procedure is a primary or secondary procedure
and the level of complexity.
Esophagus
Procedures of the esophagus are reported with codes in the 43020-
43499 range and are performed by incision, excision, endoscopy,
repair, and manipulation. The 
approach
 is the first step to determine
selection of the correct code. For example, 43100 describes the excision
of lesion, esophagus, with primary repair; cervical approach, and
43101 describes the same procedure but with a thoracic or abdominal
approach. Codes 43180-43233 report endoscopic services limited to the
esophagus. The scope may be advanced into the stomach but does not
advance to the pylorus (stricture at end of stomach).
The types of esophagus procedures are diagnostic endoscopy,
injection, biopsy, removal of foreign body, insertion of plastic
tube/stent, dilation, and hemorrhage control. Some codes, such as
43220 (balloon dilation), do not include imaging guidance (74360),
whereas other codes include the guidance, such as 43231 (diagnostic
esophagoscopy with endoscopic ultrasound examination). Note that
many codes include conscious sedation as a part of the service as
indicated by the bullseye symbol to the left of the code.
The Incision codes include both cervical approach (43020) and
thoracic approach (43045) for removal of a foreign body as illustrated
in 
Fig. 19-10
. It is important to confirm the approach used when
coding removal of a foreign body from the esophagus. The Excision
codes (43100-43135) also include various approaches in the code
description, such as cervical, thoracic, and abdominal.
If a lesion is removed from the esophagus, report the service with
43100 (cervical) or 43101 (thoracic or abdominal), depending on the
approach used. If a partial, near total, or total removal (wide excision)
of the esophagus is performed with total removal of the larynx, the
service may or may not include extensive (radical) neck dissection.
These removal services are reported with 43107, 43116 (with graft),
43124, or 31360 (total laryngectomy from the Respiratory System).
Note that some of these codes also specify the approach. For example,
43116 indicates a cervical approach.
Code 43191 is a transoral esophagoscopy by means of a rigid scope
and 43200 is by means of a flexible scope. Both are diagnostic and
include the collection of specimen(s) by brushing or washing. Both are
categorized as separate procedures and only reported if no more
major esophageal procedure was performed. Both are bundled into
the surgical services. The scope type—rigid or flexible—is the only
difference between these codes. The same procedure using a
transnasal approach is reported with 43197.
Medical necessity for a diagnostic procedure must be documented
in the medical record. For example, the signs and/or symptoms
demonstrate the medical necessity of the service. If the service has 0
global days, this means the procedure includes all preoperative and
postoperative care related to performing the procedure on the day of
the procedure; but before or after the day of the procedure, any
services related to the procedure are reported separately. The
diagnostic esophagoscopy is bundled into all endoscopy procedures
reported with 43180-43233 and 43235-43259, 43210.
Codes 43180-43233 describe therapeutic procedures on the
esophagus. Codes 43192 and 43201 describe transoral esophagoscopy
with submucosal injections of any substance. You must report the
substance injected; for example, botulinum toxin (J0585) to treat
esophageal spasms.
Codes 43193, 43198, and 43202 describe single or multiple biopsy
procedures based on the approach—transoral or transnasal—and the
type of scope—flexible or rigid. As with all codes, the diagnosis must
support the medical necessity of the esophagoscopy. For example,
some diagnoses that would support the medical necessity of the
esophagoscopy would be K22.8, esophageal leukoplakia, K21.9,
esophageal reflux, or R13.10, unspecified dysphagia.
Codes 43194 or 43215 report a transoral esophagoscopy for removal
of foreign body(s). The medical necessity of this procedure would be
demonstrated by a diagnosis code such as T18.1/935.1 (foreign body in
esophagus). If radiology is used during the procedure, report the
radiology service with 74235 (Removal of foreign body(s), esophageal,
with use of balloon catheter, radiological supervision, and
interpretation).
The removal or ablation of esophageal polyp(s), tumor(s), or other
lesion(s) are reported with 43216 or 43217. Hot biopsy forceps use
high frequency electrical current to remove and cauterize in one
maneuver. The forceps may be monopolar (single electrode) or bipolar
(two electrodes).
The following dilation procedures may use fluoroscopy (74360) but
do not include endoscopy:
■
 
43450, dilation of the esophagus, by unguided sound or bougie
(cylinder), single or multiple passes
■
 
43453, dilation of the esophagus, over guidewire
■
 
43460, esophagogastric tamponade, with balloon (Sengstaken type)
(A balloon is placed into the esophagus and inflated to stop
bleeding.)
If an endoscopy is performed in addition to any of these dilation
procedures, report a code that bundles the dilation and the endoscopic
guidance, such as 43213.
A submucosal injection is one that is performed to ease the removal
of polyps. Fluid, usually saline, is injected around the polyp and the
fluid elevates the polyp to allow for easier excision. When a
submucosal injection is performed, report the service based on the
delivery method. For example, submucosal injection by means of:
■
 
Esophagoscopy, 43192, 43201
■
 
EGD, 43236
■
 
Sigmoidoscopy, 45335
■
 
Colonoscopy, 45381
An 
EGD
 
CODING SHOT
EGD code 43259 is assigned when an endoscopic 
ultrasound
examination is performed. As stated in the parenthetical note
immediately following CPT code 43259, the radiological supervision
and interpretation is 
NOT
 reported separately with 76975.
(esophagogastroduodenoscopy) is a procedure
performed to examine the esophagus, stomach,
duodenum, and sometimes the jejunum for signs
of bleeding, tumors, erosion, ulcers, or other
abnormalities. The EGD is often performed in
conjunction with another procedure. For example,
code 43405 reports an EGD with suturing of the
esophagogastric junction. During this procedure,
a special suturing system is inserted through the
scope, the physician then places a series of stitches
in the esophagogastric junction, essentially
pleating the sphincter to prevent the backflow of
stomach acid into the esophagus. The medical
necessity of the procedure would be
demonstrated with a diagnosis code, such as
K21.9.
More than one procedure may be performed during the same
operative session, for example, a transoral with flexible scope EGD
performed with 
biopsy
 and 
dilation
 of gastric outlet due to
obstruction. The services are performed during the same endoscopic
session and are reported as:
■
 
43245
 (Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, flexible, transoral; with
dilation
 of gastric/duodenal stricture(s) [e.g., balloon, bougie])
■
 
43239
 (Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, flexible, transoral; with
biopsy
, single or multiple)
TOOLBOX 19-1
 
Karla has complaints of a tightening sensation in her throat when she
swallows and feels as if she is choking when she eats. She has lost 10
pounds in the last 4 months because she is hesitant to eat for fear of
choking. The physician performs a procedure that is reported with
43213.
Questions
1.
 What is the diagnostic term that describes Karla’s chief complaint?
_________________________________
2.
 What is the code description term that means “against the flow”?
__________________________________
3.
 Does 43213 include fluoroscopic guidance? _________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Reporting multiple procedures on the same day and by the same
provider is allowed (aside from E/M services). Any additional
procedures to the primary procedure would be reported with
modifier -51. However, if a biopsy was performed on two different
sites, modifier -59 would be appended to the additional biopsy site.
An endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (
ERCP,
43260-43278) is an endoscopic procedure of the pancreatic ducts,
hepatic ducts, common bile ducts, duodenal papilla, and/or
gallbladder (hepatobiliary system) and is performed primarily to
diagnose and treat conditions of the bile ducts, including gallstones,
inflammatory strictures (scars), leaks (due to trauma or surgery),
disease of the liver, and cancer. ERCP combines the use of x-rays and
endoscope. Through the endoscope, the physician can visualize the
inside of the stomach and duodenum, and injects dye into the ducts of
the biliary tree and pancreas to be viewed on x-ray. The scope is
advanced through the esophagus, into the stomach, to the duodenal
papilla (papilla of Vater), and contrast is then injected to visualize the
bile ducts and biliary tract, including the gallbladder. Assignment of
these codes is based on purpose of the procedure as diagnostic or
therapeutic. The codes do not include the radiological supervision and
interpretation, so when performed, report:
■
 
74328 (biliary ductal system)
■
 
74329 (pancreatic ductal system)
■
 
74330 (biliary and pancreatic ductal systems)
When an ERCP is performed for a 
diagnostic
 purpose by means of
an endoscopy, report the service with 43260. During the procedure,
the physician may view the common bile duct or the entire biliary
tract. The procedure may be with or without the collection of
specimen(s) by brushing or washing, which is not reported separately
because collection is included in the code description. If there is no
definitive diagnosis documented in the medical record, assign code(s)
for the documented signs and symptoms.
 
CODING SHOT
There are times when the insertion for visualization cannot be
accomplished, due to a variety of factors. A failed ERCP is reported
with 43235-43259, 43210.
Laparoscopy (43279-43289). 
Surgical laparoscopy is a procedure to examine the organs of the
abdominal cavity and always includes diagnostic laparoscopy. A
laparoscope is a thin flexible tube containing a camera. The scope is
placed through a small incision in the abdomen (
Fig. 19-11
 ) and
produces images that can be viewed on a computer screen. A similar
procedure is utilized to view the organs of the pelvis (gynecologic
laparoscopy or pelviscopy).
EXERCISE 19-2
Pharynx, Adenoids, Tonsils, and
Esophagus
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Tonsillectomy of an 18-year-old with chronic hypertrophic tonsillitis
CPT Code: ____________________
 
FIGURE 19–11
Location of incisions for insertion of laparoscope.
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Suture of pharynx after injury
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Esophagotomy using a thoracic approach for removal of a penny
that was lodged in the child’s throat
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Thoracic approach was employed for excision of a lesion from the
esophagus. The procedure included primary repair.
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Dilation of the esophagus by means of a bougie with multiple
passes.
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Stomach
The Stomach codes 43500-43999 include incisional procedures in
which the stomach is exposed to the view of the surgeon, such as
43500 (gastrotomy with exploration or foreign body removal). Other
procedures are performed by means of a scope, such as 43653
(laparoscopic gastrostomy). Be certain to identify the method used to
perform the procedure before assigning a code.
Gastric bypass surgery is performed on patients who are morbidly
obese with the outcome of decreasing the size of the stomach and/or
intestines to aid with weight loss. There are many techniques used for
gastric bypass procedures. A 
Roux-en-Y
 (RNY) is a Y-shaped surgical
connection in which the intestine is detached from its original origin
and reattached so as to bypass a part of the stomach and the entire
duodenum (first part of the small intestine) as illustrated in 
Fig. 19-12
.
The Roux-en-Y term is used in several code descriptions, such as
43621 (total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction) and 43644
(laparoscopic gastric restriction, with gastric bypass and Roux-en-Y
gastroenterostomy). For an open procedure, a 6- to 9-inch incision is
made in the abdomen to gain access to the stomach and intestines. For
a laparoscopic procedure about six access ports are established
measuring about 1⁄4 to 1⁄2 inch each in diameter through which the
surgical instruments are inserted. The laparoscopic procedures are
much less invasive and decrease the time the patient spends in the
hospital, recovery time, and complications.
 
FIGURE 19–12
Roux-en-Y (RNY) gastric bypass.
Bariatric Surgery
 codes 43770-43775 also report procedures
performed for gastric restrictive procedures that are accomplished by
placing a restrictive device around the stomach to decrease its
functional size. Code 43770 reports “placement of adjustable gastric
restrictive device (e.g., gastric band and subcutaneous port
components)” (
Fig. 19-13
). The band is adjustable because the band is
hollow and contains a tube that can be inflated with fluid. After
surgery, fluid is gradually inserted into the tube through a
subcutaneous port (just beneath the skin) with a syringe. The
physician can adjust the amount of fluid in the tube and thereby
adjust the amount of food that can pass through the banded area. The
procedure may be performed on an outpatient basis and is reversible
by removal of the banding apparatus.
 
FIGURE 19–13
Adjustable gastric restrictive device.
Medicare released its new policy for bariatric surgery in February of
2009, which covers open and laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass,
laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, and open and laparoscopic
biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. CMS will not require
that candidates for bariatric surgery first attempt a dietary weight-loss
program. Bariatric surgery is available for any Medicare beneficiary
with a body mass index of 35 or greater with at least one comorbidity
related to obesity. Coverage is provided only if the bariatric surgery is
performed at a medical center designated as a Center of Excellence by
the American Society for Bariatric Surgery (ASBS) or certified as a
Level 1 Bariatric Surgery Center by the American College of Surgeons.
Intestines (except rectum)
The large intestine is about 5 feet long with a wider diameter than the
small intestine. The small intestine is about 30 feet long. The Intestine
codes 44005-44799 exclude codes to report services for the anus and
rectum.
Separate procedures are common in this subheading. Colostomies
(creation of an artificial opening) are always bundled into a more
major procedure unless the code specifically states to report the
colostomy separately. For example, code 44141 is a partial colectomy
and includes establishment of a colostomy.
Many intestinal procedures are performed through endoscopes
(such as the gastroscopy in 
Fig. 19-14
 ). Endoscope codes are available
for procedures depending on how far down (through the mouth) or
up (through the anus) the scope is passed. The code selection varies
according to the procedure performed and includes the sites the scope
passed through to accomplish the procedure. To choose the proper
code, the extent of the procedure must be determined. For example, if
a flexible scope is passed to the esophagus only, the code would be
chosen from the endoscopy codes 43180-43233. If the scoping is
continued through the esophagus to the stomach, duodenum, and/or
jejunum, the code selection would be from the endoscopy codes
43235-43259, 43210 (upper GI). Once the anatomic site of the
endoscope procedure is correctly identified, the surgical procedure(s)
performed guides the selection of the code. A surgical endoscopy
always includes a diagnostic endoscopy. Assign modifier -51 if more
than one procedure is performed.
 
CODING SHOT
To choose the correct endoscopy, identify the farthest 
extent
 to which
the scope was passed and then the procedure(s) performed.
 
 
 
FIGURE 19–14
Illustration of endoscopy and endoscopic images of
the gastroesophageal junction. 
A,
 Endoscopy. 
B,
 Normal. 
C,
Esophageal cancer at the gastroesophageal junction.
Resection
 of the intestine means taking out a portion of the
intestine and either joining the remaining ends (anastomosis) directly
or developing an artificial opening (exteriorizing) through the
abdominal wall. 
Fig. 19-15
 illustrates three types of anastomoses. The
artificial opening (stoma) allows for the removal of body waste
products (
Fig. 19-16
), as with the colostomy. The type of anastomosis
or exteriorization depends on the medical condition of the patient and
on the amount of intestine (large or small) that has to be removed.
Some patients have temporary exteriorization for the length of time it
takes the remaining intestine to heal and begin to perform the
necessary functions. Other patients have permanent exteriorization
because too much of the intestine has been removed to allow for
adequate functioning. Openings to the outside of the body are named
for the part of the intestine from which they are formed—colostomy is
an artificial opening from the colon, ileostomy from the ileum,
gastrostomy from the stomach, and so forth (
Fig. 19-17
). To assign the
correct code, identify the correct anatomic site from which the ostomy
originated, as well as the procedure used to establish the ostomy.
 
QUICK CHECK 19-2
1. 
The first step to choosing the correct GI endoscopic code is to
determine the ____________________ to which the scope was
passed.
 
FIGURE 19–15
Three types of anastomoses.
 
FIGURE 19–16
Stoma.
 
FIGURE 19–17
Various ostomies.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Sometimes, a laparotomy (surgical opening into the abdomen) is
used as the approach in digestive system surgeries, and the approach
is never coded separately. An exploratory laparotomy may be
performed to investigate the cause of a patient’s illness. If only the
exploratory laparotomy is performed, it is appropriate to report the
service with an exploratory laparotomy code, such as 49000. However,
if the exploratory procedure progressed to a more definitive surgical
treatment (such as an appendectomy), only the definitive treatment
(appendectomy) is reported.
Meckel’s diverticulum and the
mesentery
A Meckel’s diverticulum is a fairly common congenital pouch on the
wall of the small bowel that may contain pancreatic or stomach tissue
and may require surgical removal (44800). Removal of the
omphalomesenteric duct refers to the embryonic passage that
connects an egg sac to the intestine and is included in the code
description of 44800.
EXERCISE 19-3
Stomach and Intestines (Except Rectum)
Using your knowledge of medical terminology, identify the following
surgical communications:
1 
Coloproctostomy: from the ____________________ to the
____________________
2 
Ileostomy: from the ____________________to the
____________________ surface
3 
Colostomy: from the ____________________ intestine to the
____________________ surface
4 
Enteroenterostomy: between ____________________ of intestine
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
5 
Partial bowel resection with colostomy for primary, malignant
neoplasm
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
Resection of small intestine, single resection, with anastomosis
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Appendix
Surgical procedures of the appendix may be accomplished by means
of
Open
 procedures:
■
 
44900, open I&D of abscess
■
 
44950, open surgical appendectomy
Percutaneous
 procedures:
■
 
49406, percutaneous image-guided I&D of abscess
Laparoscopic
 procedures:
■
 
44970, laparoscopic appendectomy
There are two other codes to report appendectomy procedures.
■
 
44955, appendectomy performed at the time of a major procedure
for an indicated purpose
■
 
44960, appendectomy when appendix has ruptured or there is
generalized peritonitis
The reporting of 44950 and 44955 needs special attention because
there are times when a surgeon will remove a healthy appendix
during the course of another abdominal procedure. Because the
abdomen is already open to the view of the surgeon, the incidental
appendectomy (44950) does not add to the complexity of the
procedure and is not reported separately. If, however, during another
major abdominal procedure, the surgeon removes the appendix due
to a medically necessary reason, the service is reported with 44955.
Colon and rectum
Colon and Rectum procedures are reported with codes from the
45000-45999 range. These procedures involve the colon and rectum
and employ techniques such as incision, excision, and destruction.
Many of the codes are very complex. For example:
■
 
45126, Pelvic exenteration for colorectal malignancy, with
proctectomy (with or without colostomy), with removal of bladder
and ureteral transplantations, and/or hysterectomy, or
cervicectomy, with or without removal of tube(s), with or without
removal of ovary(s), or any combination thereof
This complex code description contains many procedures that may
or may not have been performed as indicated by the “with or
without.” For example, with or without colostomy or with or without
removal of tubes and ovaries. If any of the listed procedures were
performed, they are bundled in the main code (45126) and not
reported separately. Complex codes such as 45126 increase the
potential for unintentional unbundling.
Endoscopy (proctosigmoidoscopy,
sigmoidoscopy, and colonoscopy)
Rectal endoscopic procedures are frequently performed and include
proctosigmoidoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, and colonoscopy (
Fig. 19-18
).
 
FIGURE 19–18
Colonoscopy measurements (cm).
Proctosigmoidoscopy. 
Endoscopic examination of the rectum (proct/o = rectum) and the
sigmoid colon (45300-45327). The scope is advanced 6-25 cm (2.4-9.8
in). Code 45300 describes a rigid proctosigmoidoscopy, diagnostic,
with or without collection of specimen(s) by brushing or washing
(separate procedure). Do not assign 45300 when reported with codes
45303-45327, because these codes report surgical procedures, so the
diagnostic service of 45300 is bundled into the surgical procedure. If
no definitive diagnosis is documented, report the documented
signs/symptoms.
Sigmoidoscopy. 
Endoscopic examination of the sigmoid colon may include the
descending colon (45330-45350). The scope is advanced 26-60 cm
(10.2-23.6 in). A sigmoidoscopy is the examination of the entire rectum
and sigmoid colon and may include examination of a portion of the
descending colon but stops before reaching the splenic flexure (the
turn beneath the spleen that connects the descending to the transverse
colon). Code 45330 describes a flexible diagnostic sigmoidoscopy that
includes the collection of specimen(s) by brushing or washing
(separate procedure). Do not code 45330 when also reporting 45331-
45350 because they are surgical procedures and the diagnostic
procedure (45330) is always included in the surgical procedure. If a
definitive diagnosis has not been documented, report the documented
signs/symptoms.
Diagnostic colonoscopy. 
Endoscopic examination of the colon from rectum to cecum is
reported with codes from the 45378-45398 range. The scope is
advanced more than 60 cm (more than 23.6 in).
The diagnostic colonoscopy codes are divided based on the extent
and the purpose of the procedure. The diagnostic stand-alone codes
45300, 45330, and 45378 each have a list of indented procedure codes
based on the purpose of the procedure (such as biopsy, foreign body
removal, ablation, control of bleeding, etc.). Take a moment to locate
these codes in the CPT manual and familiarize yourself with the types
of procedures reported with the codes.
If the patient is fully prepared for the endoscopic procedure, and
the procedure has begun but is not completed because of extenuating
circumstances, use modifier -53 (Discontinued Procedure) appended
to the endoscopic code. Some payers, such as Medicare, require the
coder to report -53 for a procedure that could not be completed. These
extenuating circumstances could be that the patient has become
unstable, the bowel preparation for the surgery was not sufficient to
continue the procedure, or an equipment failure occurred. Use either
-52 or -53 and provide supporting documentation as to why the
procedure was discontinued.
Colonoscopy. 
Codes 45378-45398 describe procedures in which the endoscope is
advanced to the proximal colon (past the splenic flexure) to the cecum
or into a portion of the terminal ileum (most distant part of the small
intestine).
To report colonoscopy procedures, first determine how the
procedure was performed:
■
 
Through a colostomy (44380-44408)
■
 
Through a colotomy (45399)
■
 
Through the rectum (45378-45398)
When the colon is examined through a colostomy (surgically
created opening in the abdominal wall), the diagnostic or therapeutic
service is reported with codes 44388-44397.
Report 45380 (colonoscopy with biopsy(ies)) when a “
cold biopsy
”
is performed. A cold biopsy is generally accepted to mean the use of
forceps to grasp and remove a small piece of tissue without the
application of cautery. For example, one polyp was snared and three
polyps were biopsied with cold biopsy forceps. The service would be
reported with 45385 (colonoscopy with removal of tumor/polyp/lesion
by snare technique) and 45380 (colonoscopy with biopsy(ies)). During
a snare procedure, a wire loop is placed around the lesion and the
wire is then heated to shave off the lesion. Larger lesions may be
removed with a single application of the snare or with several
applications (called piecemeal). Remnants may also be cauterized 
or
ablated to completely destroy the lesion. The assignment of the code is
not dependent on the histology of the tissue obtained for analysis.
Report only one technique for each lesion or polyp.
Colonoscopy with removal by snare technique (45385) should not
be reported when describing the removal of a small polyp by biopsy
or cold forceps technique.
A colonoscopy with biopsy and polypectomy in separate sites are
reported with two codes. The biopsy may require modifier -59 to
identify the service as a separate procedure from the polyp procedure.
Code 45378 describes a flexible diagnostic colonoscopy up to the
splenic flexure and is bundled into the colonoscopy procedure codes
45379-45398. If no definitive diagnosis is documented, assign
diagnosis code(s) for signs/symptoms.
CMS RULES
When a covered colonoscopy is attempted but cannot be completed
due to extenuating circumstances (e.g., the inability to extend beyond
the splenic flexure), Medicare will usually pay for the interrupted
colonoscopy at the rate of a flexible sigmoidoscopy (45331-45347).
Here are some endoscopic biopsy highlights:
■
 
If a single lesion is biopsied, but not entirely removed, only a biopsy
code would be assigned.
■
 
If a biopsy is obtained and the lesion is also excised, only the
excision of a lesion code would be reported.
■
 
If a biopsy and excision were performed, it would be appropriate to
report the biopsy if taken from a lesion other than the lesion that
was excised. The CPT code for the excision will sometimes state
“with or without biopsy,” in which case you would not report the
biopsy separately. If multiple biopsy specimens are obtained,
whether from the same or different sites, and none of the lesions are
excised, only one unit (×1) of the biopsy code is assigned.
Evaluation and management services reported with a
diagnostic colonoscopy. 
Reporting a minor procedure (10-day global period) with an office
visit service can be problematic. The E/M service must be medically
necessary and include work above and beyond what is required for
the minor procedure. If the E/M service is medically necessary, the
E/M code will require modifier -25, which reports a significantly
separate E/M service that occurs on the same day as the procedure or
service by the same individual. Check the documentation to
determine if the E/M service was prompted by a complaint, symptom,
condition, problem, or circumstance that was or was not related to the
procedure or other service provided.
CMS RULES
HCPCS Level II Codes for Colorectal Cancer Screening
 The
following are the guidelines to report screening services for colorectal
cancer for patients who are beneficiaries under the Medicare
program. Screening means no presenting symptoms or disease is
present.
A therapeutic procedure is reported when a disease is identified or
additional procedures are performed via the scope (biopsy, ablation,
etc.). The examination may begin as screening and changes to a
therapeutic service if pathology is found or if additional procedures
(biopsy, etc.) were performed. According to MLN Matters, Number
SE0746, the diagnosis code(s) assigned would be the code for the
screening exam, Z12.11, followed by the abnormal findings, such as
polyp of colon, K63.5. This rule is synonymous with the 
Official
Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
, which states, “Should a condition
be discovered during the screening then the code for the condition
may be assigned as an additional diagnosis.” Medicare waives the
Part B deductible for colorectal cancer screening under the Affordable
Care Act. When a screening scope is converted to a diagnostic or
therapeutic procedure (i.e., when a defect is found and when a found
defect is corrected), the procedure is still covered, if it began as a
screening exam. To alert CMS that a screening exam has been
converted to a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure, append modifier
–PT to the screening code. The deductible will be waived for the
patient.
HCPCS code G0328 (immunoassay) reports fecal-occult blood tests,
which examine the stool for blood. When the patient returns the fecal
sample cards, the laboratory performs one to three simultaneous
determinations. This means that one to three of the cards will be
tested for the presence of blood. Occult blood is that which cannot be
seen but is present microscopically. The order for and the results of
the test must be documented in the medical record. Usually this
service is provided to patients 50 years of age and older once every
year as a screening for colorectal cancer.
Coverage of G0104, a screening flexible sigmoidoscopy, is provided
to patients who are at least 50 years of age and is covered once every
4 years. If a lesion is identified, removed, or biopsied during a
screening flexible sigmoidoscopy, the procedure is reported as a
diagnostic flexible sigmoidoscopy with biopsy or removal of lesion
using 45331, 45332, 45333, 45338, 45346 (sigmoidoscopy with biopsy,
removal or ablation). The first-listed diagnosis code would report the
screening, Z12.11, followed by the lesion (the finding).
Code G0105 reports a screening colonoscopy on a patient at high
risk; which means the patient has a:
■
 
Personal history of colorectal cancer (Z85.038, Z85.048)
■
 
Personal history of adenomatous polyps (Z86.010)
■
 
Inflammatory bowel disease, including Crohn’s disease, and
ulcerative colitis
■
 
A close relative (sibling, parent, or child) who has had colorectal
cancer or an adenomatous polyposis (Z80.0, Z83.71)
■
 
Family history of adenomatous polyposis (Z83.71)
■
 
Family history of nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Z80.0)
If during a screening colonoscopy, a lesion or growth is detected
that results in a biopsy or removal of the growth, the appropriate
therapeutic procedure is reported with modifier –PT.
Code 45378 describes a diagnostic, flexible colonoscopy of the colon
from the anus to the cecum or terminal ileum. An appropriate
screening diagnosis for this procedure would be Z12.11 (Special
screening for malignant neoplasms, colon). This code is reported
when there are no additional procedures performed by means of the
scope.
These are the HCPCS colorectal screening codes:
■
 
G0104 flexible sigmoidoscopy
■
 
G0105 colonoscopy on individual at high risk
■
 
G0106 alternative to G0104, screening sigmoidoscopy, barium
enema
■
 
G0120 alternative to G0105, screening colonoscopy, barium enema
■
 
G0121 colonoscopy on individual not meeting criteria for high risk
■
 
G0122 colorectal cancer screening, barium enema
A barium enema is a series of x-rays of the colon and rectum taken
after the patient drinks a white, chalky solution that contains barium
(a metallic element). The barium outlines the intestines on the x-rays.
The barium enema (G0106, screening sigmoidoscopy, barium enema)
may be performed as an alternative to a screening sigmoidoscopy
(G0104, flexible sigmoidoscopy) based on documentation that the
physician determined that the barium enema would be as good as or
better than a flexible sigmoidoscopy or screening colonoscopy due to
the patient’s specific medical problem. G0104 may also be assigned as
an alternative to G0106 for patients who are:
■
 
At least 50 years old
■
 
Not at high risk for colorectal cancer
■
 
It has been at least 48 months since the last screening was performed
Code G0120 reports a colorectal screening with barium enema that
is performed as an alternative to G0105 (colonoscopy on individual at
high risk for colorectal cancer).
If the patient does not meet the criteria for a high-risk patient,
G0121 is reported once every 10 years for patients over 50 years of
age. The diagnosis code Z12.11 is reported with submission of G0121.
(CMS Transmittal 684, issued March 2, 2011)
 
CAUTION 
When a biopsy is taken, the physician removes a tissue sample for
pathological evaluation. Excision is the removal of the entire lesion and
ablation destroys the entire lesion.
Colonoscopy injection. 
The injection service described in 45381 may be performed when the
polyp is injected with saline to lift the polyp prior to removal by
another technique. Other injection services include the placement of a
tattoo with India ink for later identification of the area during a
surgical procedure. When the purpose of an injection is to control
spontaneous bleeding from conditions such as diverticulosis and
angiodysplasia (AVM), report the service with 45382 (colonoscopy
with control of bleeding, including injection) rather than 45381
(colonoscopy with submucosal injection). Code 45381 is reported as an
additional service to another therapeutic service procedure, but it is
not an add-on code. Bleeding caused by the procedure and controlled
by any method is considered part of the therapeutic procedure and is
not reported separately with codes 45382 or 45381.
Multiple procedures. 
If multiple lesions are removed from the colon using the same
technique (snare), use only one code to report the services because the
colon is considered one anatomical location. If the procedure is
prolonged or unusually extensive, report modifier -22 and include the
time the procedure extended beyond the time usual for the procedure.
The submission of modifier -22 requires documentation sent with the
claim form that supports the assignment of the modifier.
Virtual colonoscopy. 
A virtual colonoscopy (VC) (74261, 74262) utilizes x-rays and
computer to produce a two- and three-dimensional image of the
colon. The procedure is used to diagnose colon and bowel disease,
including polyps, cancer, and diverticulosis. The VC can also be
performed using computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imagining (MRI), as illustrated in 
Fig. 19-19
. The procedure is
performed in a radiology department and does not require sedation.
A tube is inserted into the rectum and air is pumped into the colon
thereby inflating the colon, which allows for better visualization. The
patient lies on a table that is moved into a scanner that produces the
images by means of the computer. This process is repeated with the
patient lying on his/her back and again, on the stomach.
 
FIGURE 19–19
The virtual colonoscopy.
Virtual colonoscopy may be performed when a colonoscopy cannot
be successfully completed and is used as a technique for screening.
Because colonoscopy can more accurately detect colon cancer, virtual
colonoscopy may be medically necessary only when colonoscopy
cannot be successfully performed or extended to the cecum, to
evaluate submucosal abnormalities detected by other imaging studies,
or immediately following a failed standard colonoscopy.
CMS RULES
When reporting the CT colonography service for Medicare patients,
report:
■
 
74261-74262
 (Computed tomographic [CT] colonography,
diagnostic, including image postprocessing; without contrast and
with contrast material(s), including non-contrast images, if
performed)
NOTE: 
74263
 (Computed tomographic [CT] colonography,
screening, including imagine postprocessing) is not a covered
Medicare service (Pub 100-03, Transmittal 105, August 7, 2009).
EXERCISE 19-4
Appendix, Colon, and Rectum
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Appendectomy on a patient with acute ruptured appendix, with
generalized peritonitis
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Flexible sigmoidoscopy with three biopsies
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Colonoscopy with removal of polyp by a snare
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
The patient presents for removal of sigmoid and rectal polyps. The
Pentax video sigmoidoscope was inserted and four polyps were
seen scattered between the rectum and proximal sigmoid colon. The
largest measured about 1.5 cm in diameter. The others were
diminutive, about 4 or 5 mm in diameter. Biopsies were taken of
two of these polyps. The pathology report indicated benign polyps.
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Anus
Abscess is a common anal condition that is usually treated with
incision and drainage (I&D); however, when I&D fails to satisfactorily
treat the abscess, other methods may be used. Procedures on the anus
are reported with 46020-46999 and include incision, excision,
introduction, endoscopy, repair, destruction, and other procedures.
Several of the codes in the Anus subheading refer to a seton, such as
46020 (seton placement) or 46030 (seton removal). A seton is a
treatment for anal fistula (abnormal passage between anus and skin),
which is usually the result of a previous abscess that has drained but
not completely healed. A nonabsorbable suture is threaded through
the fistula, out through the anus, and the two ends of the suture are
tied together, as illustrated in 
Fig. 19-20
. The seton is left in place until
healing has occurred. Scar tissue forms around the suture and the
ends of the seton are eventually cut away. Usually the seton can be
placed during an office procedure that does not require anesthesia. If
the fistula is more complex and requires opening of the fistula track,
the service would be reported with a code from the 46270-46285
range.
 
FIGURE 19–20
Suture threaded through the fistula.
A 
fissure
 is a cleft or a groove, normal or otherwise, as illustrated in
Fig. 19-21
. An anal fissure is a painful ulcer usually located at the
margin of the anus. Code 46200 reports a fissurectomy, which is the
excision of the fissure. Sphincterotomy is a surgical incision of a
sphincter and if it is performed in conjunction with a fissurectomy, it
is bundled into 46200 and not reported separately.
 
FIGURE 19–21
Anal fissure.
A more complex type of anal repair procedure is the closure of an
anal fistula with rectal advancement flap. This procedure is reported
with 46288, and often third-party payers bundle many other
procedures into the closure procedure. So read the payer guidelines
carefully before submitting.
CMS RULES
When reporting 46288 for a Medicare patient, the NCCI edits indicate
the following codes are bundled into 46288: 45900, 45905, 45910,
45915, 46040, 46080, 46200, 46220, 46221, 46600, 46601, 46940, and
46942. These component codes cannot be reported to Medicare when
performed at the same session as code 46288. The edits are posted on
the CMS website at 
www.cms.gov/NationalCorrectCodInitEd/
.
An anoscope is an instrument that is inserted a short distance into
the anal canal (
Fig. 19-22
). Once inserted, various procedures may be
performed, such as dilation, biopsy, removal of a foreign body or
lesion, and control of hemorrhage. Procedures that utilize an anoscope
are reported with endoscopy codes 46600-46615.
 
FIGURE 19–22
Stainless steel anoscope.
Code 46600 describes a 
diagnostic anoscopy
 (up to 5 cm [2 in]) with
dilation and includes collection of specimens. This code is designated
as a “separate procedure,” which means it cannot be reported if
performed with another related service during the same session.
The remaining Endoscopy codes describe procedures for foreign
body removal, removal of tumor or polyp by different techniques, and
control of bleeding.
Destruction
 of anal lesions can be accomplished by various
methods, such as chemical, electrodesiccation, cryosurgery, laser
surgery, and surgical excision. Destruction of anal lesions is reported
with codes 46900-46942, often based on the type of destruction
utilized. For example, 46900 reports chemical destruction, 46910
reports electrodesiccation, and 46916 reports cryosurgery. The method
of destruction will be documented in the medical record.
Hemorrhoids
 are a frequent condition of the anus. Hemorrhoids
(piles) arise from an inflammation of the venous plexuses
(congregation of vessels) around the anus and may be inside or
outside of the anal canal. Hemorrhoids are classified into four degrees
depending on severity:
■
 
First degree may bleed but do not protrude outside of the anal
canal.
■
 
Second degree protrudes outside of the anal canal occasionally but
retracts spontaneously.
■
 
Third degree protrudes outside the anal canal more often and must
be manually placed back into the anal canal.
■
 
Fourth degree protrudes outside the anal canal but cannot be
manually placed back into the anal canal. Fourth degree
hemorrhoid may be strangulated or thrombosed as illustrated in
Fig. 19-23
.
 
FIGURE 19–23
Large thrombosed external hemorrhoid.
The surgical treatment is determined by the type of hemorrhoid.
For example, 46250 reports an external hemorrhoidectomy, whereas
46260 reports a hemorrhoidectomy of both internal and external
hemorrhoids.
Sometimes, as an alternative to surgery, hemorrhoids are treated by
injection of a sclerosing (caustic) solution, which causes irritation of
the tissue that results in increased healing. The sclerosing solution
injection is reported with 46500.
 
CODING SHOT
The dentate line is the line where the anal mucosal lining meets the
skin (mucocutaneous junction or anal verge). An internal hemorrhoid
is one that is 1-1.5 cm above this line. The internal hemorrhoid is the
one most often treated by a gastroenterologist. An external
hemorrhoid is one that is located below the dentate line.
Liver
Biopsy
 of the liver may be performed percutaneously (47000) using
imaging guidance that is reported separately. If the biopsy is
performed at the time of a more major procedure, the biopsy is
reported with add-on code 47001. A liver biopsy may also be
performed as a wedge biopsy (47100) that involves removal, through
an incision, of a small fan-shaped section of tissue for examination.
A liver 
transplant
 is a complex procedure that usually involves the
surgical expertise of several physicians and a trained surgical team.
The transplant procedure involves obtaining the graft to be
transplanted (from a cadaver or living donor), backbench work
(special preparation of the graft before transplantation), and
transplantation into the recipient. Each component of the transplant is
reported separately. There are extensive notes preceding the
transplant codes 47133-47147 that must be carefully read before
assigning codes to these complex procedures.
Biliary tract
The gallbladder is connected to the liver and the small intestine by the
biliary tract. The tract can be the site of conditions such as calculi and
tumor that may obstruct the flow of bile. An incisional procedure
(hepaticotomy or hepaticostomy) with exploration of the tract may be
performed to determine the cause of obstruction (47400) and may
include removal of calculus or drainage of bile from the tract.
A 
choledochotomy
 is an incision into the biliary tract, and a
cholecystostomy is the formation of a stoma between the abdominal
wall and the gallbladder. You locate the codes for these procedures in
the Incision category of the Biliary Tract subheading (47400-47490).
An 
injection
 procedure may be necessary to determine if the biliary
tract is obstructed. The assignment of a code is based on if the
injection is performed percutaneously through an existing access
(47531) or new access (47532). Codes 47531 and 47532 include imaging
guidance and radiological supervision and interpretation. The biliary
tract may become obstructed due to disease, such as neoplasm. 
Stents
may be placed in the obstructed biliary tract to open the area (47538-
47540). Drainage catheters may also be changed (47536) or removed
(47537).
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy involves the placement of ports
through the abdominal wall into which the laparoscope and
instrumentation are inserted to remove the gallbladder. The codes are
located in the Laparoscopy category (47562-47579). The operative
report will indicate the method used for the removal of the
gallbladder, which determines the assignment of the code. For
example, 47562 reports a laparoscopic removal of the gallbladder, and
47600 reports an incisional removal of the gallbladder.
Occasionally, the surgeon will begin the procedure using one
technique and due to a difficulty, convert the procedure to another
technique, for example, a procedure that is begun as a laparoscopic
procedure (47563) and is converted to an open procedure during the
same operative session (47605). Only the successful approach is
reported, which in this case is the open procedure (47605). Reporting
both a laparoscopic and an open surgical approach to accomplish the
same outcome is duplication of services.
Pancreas
The pancreas is located behind (posterior to) the stomach and
produces enzymes and hormones. The pancreas may become
inflamed (pancreatitis) and require the placement of drains to remove
the excess fluid. If the drain is placed by means of an incision, report
48000, but if the procedure also included cholecystostomy,
gastrostomy, and jejunostomy, report the service with 48001.
The pancreas can also be the site of a calculus that may be removed
through an incision (48020).
Biopsies of the pancreas may be performed by means of an open
(48100) or percutaneous (48102) procedure. Guidance is not included
in the percutaneous biopsy code, so guidance is reported separately
depending on the type of guidance used. If there was an injection
portion to the intraoperative pancreatogram (radiography of pancreas
during the procedure), the injection is reported separately with add-
on code 48400 (Injection procedure, intraoperative pancreatography).
The pancreas can be totally or partially removed and codes for the
pancreatectomies (48140-48160) are divided based on the extent of
removal and other procedures that may be performed during the
same operative session.
The pancreas may be transplanted (48550-48554) and includes
harvesting the pancreas graft from a cadaver, backbench work in
preparation for transplantation, and transplantation of the graft into
the recipient.
Abdomen, peritoneum, and omentum
Laparoscopy code 49320 reports a diagnostic laparoscopic procedure.
If the procedure was a surgical procedure, the diagnostic laparoscopy
is included in the surgical procedure and not reported separately, for
example, if the procedure began as a diagnostic laparoscopy but a
lymphocele of the peritoneal cavity was identified and drained. The
diagnostic laparoscopy converted to a surgical laparoscopy and
would be reported with the surgical laparoscopy code 49323.
Hernia codes are listed according to type of hernia (see Repair
49491-49611 and Laparoscopy 49650-49659). 
Fig. 19-24
 is an
illustration of an inguinal hernia that would usually be surgically
repaired by a herniorrhaphy. The defect would be closed with sutures.
Other factors in coding hernias are whether the hernia is 
strangulated
(the blood supply is cut off) or 
incarcerated
 (cannot be returned to the
abdominal cavity); the repair is an initial or subsequent repair; the
hernia is reducible (can be returned to the abdominal cavity); and the
age of the patient.
 
QUICK CHECK 19-3
1. 
Name two hernia types (locations) that affect code selection for
hernia repair: ____________________ and ____________________
 
FIGURE 19–24
Hernia.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 19-5
Anus, Liver, Biliary Tract, Pancreas,
Abdomen, Peritoneum, and Omentum
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Exploratory laparotomy with a cholecystectomy
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
Cholecystotomy with exploration and removal of calculus by means
of an open procedure
CPT Code: ___________________
3 
Repair of recurrent reducible incisional hernia, with implantation of
a mesh graft, abdominal approach
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
4 
Repair of an initial incarcerated inguinal hernia in a 51⁄2-year-old
CPT Code: ___________________
5 
Total pancreatectomy
CPT Code: ___________________
6 
Sphincterotomy and one quadrant hemorrhoidectomy for an anal
fissure is performed. During the procedure an enlarged
hemorrhoid/sentinel tag was noted at the 10 o’clock position and a
fissure right at the base of this. Anoscope and a Kelly clamp were
placed, and a sentinel tag excised. The defect was closed with
sutures.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
From the Trenches
 
 
What advice would you give an entry-level coder?
“Network. Find people who are doing what you are doing now or what you
are getting ready to start doing
 
.
 
.
 
.
 
Pick up the phone and give him or her a
call!”
BELINDA
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 19, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 CPT codes in the Digestive System subsection are divided according
to ____________________ ____________________.
2 Shaving of the lip is called
____________________________________________________________________________.
3 The vestibule of the mouth is also called the
_______________________________
_______________________________.
4 The ________________________________
_________________________________ is the flap of skin under the
tongue.
5 What association provides a dental claim form?
___________________________________________________________
6 The roof of the mouth is called the
_____________________________________________________________________.
7 The three salivary glands are the ______________________,
______________________, and ______________________.
8 A brachial cleft cyst is a(n)
______________________________________________________________________
defect.
9 The first step taken to determine the correct code for procedures of
the esophagus is the ___________________________.
10 Decreasing the size of the stomach is a procedure performed to aid
in _________________________________________.
11 What medical term describes creation of an artificial opening in the
large intestine? _______________________________
12 What is the name for a congenital pouch on the wall of the small
bowel? ________________________________________
13 What are the three technique options used to remove the appendix?
____________________________________________
14 An endoscopic examination of the rectum and sigmoid colon is
called a(n) _____________________________________.
15 What is the opening at the end of the alimentary canal through
which solid waste matter leaves the body? _____________
16 Identify the liver procedure that usually involves team surgeons.
______________________________________________
17 What is the procedure called that involves an incision into the
biliary tract? _____________________________________
18 What organ is located behind the stomach and produces enzymes
and hormones? ________________________________
19 What is the medical term for returning a hernia to the abdominal
cavity? _______________________________________
Chapter 19, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, complete the following:
1 The codes in the Digestive System subsection begin with this
anatomic part: ___________________, and end with this anatomic part:
___________________.
2 In the Digestive System, many of the procedures performed to view
the esophagus and stomach are performed with a gastroscope, also
known as a(n) ___________________________________________.
3 What type of endoscopy is always included in a surgical endoscopy
and would therefore never be reported separately?
___________________________
4 What is the term that describes a surgical opening into the
abdomen? ____________________
5 When a hernia can be returned to the abdominal cavity, it is said to
be ___________________.
Chapter 19, part II, practical
Code the following cases using the CPT and ICD-10-CM (Separate multiple
codes with a comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX, XXXXX.
Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers. XXXXX-XX.
Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x X):
6 Repair of recurrent, reducible incisional hernia
CPT Code: ___________________
7 Repair of an incarcerated umbilical hernia for a 4-year-old patient
CPT Code: ___________________
8 Excision of full thickness lip lesion with Abbe-Estlander flap
reconstruction
CPT Code: ___________________
9 Thoracic approach used in a diverticulectomy of hypopharynx
CPT Code: ___________________
10 Total open abdominal colectomy with ileostomy
CPT Code: ___________________
11 Multiple biopsies of the small intestine by means of endoscopy
with progression past the second portion of the duodenum
CPT Code: ___________________
12 Proctosigmoidoscopy using rigid endoscope with collection of
multiple specimens by brushing
CPT Code: ___________________
13 A sigmoidoscopy with endoscopic biopsy is performed on a
Medicare patient who has an area of ulceration in the rectosigmoid
region. The excision of the tissue specimen causes bleeding that is
controlled endoscopically.
 CPT Code(s): ___________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
14 A Medicare patient presents for a flexible EGD with biopsy and
dilation of gastric outlet for obstruction both performed during the
same endoscopic session. What would the physician report?
 CPT Code(s): ___________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
15 During a colonoscopy, a mucosal lesion was removed from the mid
right colon with snare electrocautery; a colon polyp in the left colon
was removed with snare electrocautery; an excrescence 35 cm from
the anal verge was removed with biopsy forceps; additional colon
polyps were removed by snare electrocautery at 30 and 25 cm from
the anal verge; and a hyperplastic lesion was removed with piecemeal
polypectomy using hot biopsy forceps.
 CPT Code(s): ___________________
16 This Medicare patient undergoes a flexible EGD with biopsies and
dilation of an esophageal stricture. The EGD was placed into the
esophagus where stricture and esophagitis was noted. This area was
biopsied. The scope was taken to the second portion of the duodenum
and slowly withdrawn to the stomach where further biopsies were
taken. The scope was withdrawn to the esophagus where a 20-mm
balloon was inserted and the esophageal stricture was dilated. The
scope and dilator were then withdrawn.
 CPT Code(s): ___________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 20
Urinary and male genital systems
 
“If someone expresses an interest in becoming a medical coder, I’d
advise them to take a position in a physician’s office or billing area
first, so that they can get a feel for the field. Any experience in the field
helps.”
Ellen Dooley, BA, CPC-A
Compliance Analyst
 
University of Missouri Health Care
 
Columbia, Missouri
CHAPTER TOPICS
Urinary System
Male Genital System
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Understand the format and codes of the Urinary System subsection.
2 
Review the subheadings and categories of the Urinary System
subsection.
3 
Report services with Urinary System codes.
4
Understand the format and codes of the Male Genital System
subsection.
5 
Review the subheadings and categories of the Male Genital System
subsection.
6 
Report services with Male Genital System codes.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Urinary system
The Urinary System subsection (50010-53899) of the CPT manual is
arranged anatomically by the subheadings of kidney, ureter, bladder,
and urethra (
Fig. 20-1
), with category codes arranged by procedure
(i.e., incision, excision, introduction, repair). A wide range of
terminology is used in the subsection. The Glossary at the back of this
book includes many of the terms that you will encounter in the CPT
manual. Always be certain you know the meaning of all the words in
the code description before you assign a code.
 
FIGURE 20–1
The four subheadings of the Urinary System subsection
in the CPT manual are: Kidney, Ureter, Bladder, and Urethra.
Kidney
The first subheading in the Urinary subsection is Kidney (50010-
50593).
Incision. 
The Incision codes (50010-50135) are assigned to report exploration,
nephrostomy, drainage, nephrolithotomy, and pyelotomy services.
Renal exploration is a procedure performed if the cause of a
patient’s condition is unknown. For example, surgical exploration of
an injured kidney when the patient is clinically unstable and appears
to be having renal blood loss. Access for the exploration procedure is
from the side (flank). Note that a parenthetical statement preceding
50010 indicates “For retroperitoneal exploration, abscess, tumor, or
cyst, see 49010, 49060, 49203-49205,” which are Digestive System
codes. Code 49010 reports an exploration of the retroperitoneum. The
term 
retroperitoneal
 refers to that area located behind (retro to) the
peritoneum (lines the abdominal walls and covers most of the organs)
that is located in the abdominal cavity. The retroperitoneal space may
be accessed by means of an abdominal incision. When coding an
exploration of the retroperitoneal space, be careful to determine the
exact anatomical location(s) explored to report the correct services
because there are many organ systems located in the abdominal
cavity. For example, the kidney is located in the retroperitoneal space.
If only the kidney was explored, report the service with the Urinary
System code 50010; if the retroperitoneal area was explored, report the
service with the Digestive System code 49010, exploration of
retroperitoneal area.
If a procedure begins as an exploratory procedure but becomes a
definitive or corrective procedure, such as repair of a lacerated
kidney, only the definitive procedure is reported. The exploration is
considered a diagnostic procedure that is bundled into the definitive
procedure when both are performed during the same operative
session.
Open drainage of a perirenal or renal abscess (50020) reports the
drainage of a 
kidney abscess
 or the surrounding kidney tissue. If the
drainage was of a retroperitoneal abscess, the service would be
reported with the Digestive System code 49060 that reports an open
drainage of a retroperitoneal abscess. Again, the exact location of the
abscess is the critical factor when assigning the abscess drainage code.
The renal abscess can also be accessed percutaneously, in which case
the service would be reported with 49405. When performing a
percutaneous access to the kidney, image guidance may be used for
the needle placement and is bundled into 49405.
A 
nephrostomy
 is a procedure used to decompress the renal system
by means of the insertion of a catheter into the kidney while leaving
the other end of the catheter outside the body to temporarily drain the
kidney. The renal collecting system may be obstructed by a calculus or
a defect of the renal pelvis or ureter. Code 50040 reports incisional
placement of a drainage tube that involves incision into the renal
pelvis (pyelotomy). The physician then inserts a catheter into the
kidney with the other end carried to the skin surface and sutured in
place on the flank.
A 
nephrotomy
 is exploration of the inside of the kidney. During
this exploration (50045), no definitive procedure is performed. If a
definitive procedure is performed the exploration is bundled into the
definitive procedure. For example, if the surgeon began a procedure
as an exploration to determine the cause of urinary obstruction and
identified a renal calculus (kidney stone) and removed the calculus,
the procedure no longer would be an exploration. The procedure
would be reported with 50060, kidney stone removal
(nephrolithotomy). The surgeon may also perform a renal endoscopy
at the same time as the nephrotomy (such as, to place stents or
perform some other type of repair procedure), and the endoscopy is
reported separately with a code from range 50570-50580 (Endoscopy,
kidney).
Nephrolithotomy
 procedures include removal of calculus (50060),
secondary surgical operation for calculus (50065), procedures
complicated by congenital kidney abnormality (50070), and removal
of a staghorn calculus (50075). The staghorn calculus (
Fig. 20-2
) is
shaped like a deer antler and can become large and create extensive
obstruction. If the calculus involves the renal pelvis and at least two
calyces, it is classified as a staghorn calculus. These types of stones
account for about 30% of stones reported and are usually associated
with urinary infections. With a staghorn, a nephrolithotomy may be
performed after extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL), which
fragments the stones (50590).
 
FIGURE 20–2
Large staghorn calculus inside the kidney filling the
pelvis and calyceal system.
ESWL
 used to be performed with a machine in which the patient
was submersed in a fluid. Newer machines do not require
submersion, rather the patient is placed on an 
x-ray table, and a water-
filled cushion is placed under the patient’s back (
Fig. 20-3
). The
procedure is performed under general anesthesia in an operating
room with a built-in ESWL machine. The shock waves are targeted to
the stones by means of x-ray and pulverize the stones with repeated
shocks. Usually, the particles subsequently pass through the urinary
tract.
 
FIGURE 20–3
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL).
Percutaneous nephrolithotomy
 (nephrolithotripsy) is a more
invasive method of treating kidney stones and usually is performed
with ultrasound. An incision is made over the kidney, a probe is
inserted, and shock waves pulverize the stone. Electrohydraulic or
mechanical lithotripsy may be used instead of shock waves, but the
use of shock waves is the most common method. A tiny basket may
also be attached to a probe that is passed into the kidney and the
stones removed. Because the stone fragments of a staghorn are so
large, they may not pass through the urinary system spontaneously,
and an open or percutaneous procedure may need to be performed to
remove the fragments. The lithotripsy is reported separately (50590
lithotripsy or 52353 cystourethroscope with lithotripsy).
 
QUICK CHECK 20-1
1. 
When lithotripsy is performed to fragment kidney stones, the
particles always pass out of the body through the urinary system.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Percutaneous 
nephrostolithotomy
 (PCNL) or a 
pyelostolithotomy
is a procedure to remove kidney stones. In this procedure, entry is
through the patient’s back. The procedure is reported based on the
size of the stone removed (50080, to 2 cm; 50081, >2 cm). Internal
lithotripsy is included in 50080 and 50081 and is not reported
separately. External lithotripsy is not included in the codes and can be
reported in addition to 50080 and 50081; but remember to attach
modifier -51 to the lesser procedure. The procedure is performed with
fluoroscopic guidance that is reported separately with 76000 for the
radiologist or 76001 for the radiologist who assists a nonradiological
physician.
Excision. 
There are Excision codes in the Kidney subheading for biopsy,
nephrectomy (removal of the kidney), and removal of a cyst. The
biopsy codes (50200, 50205) are based on the approach, either
percutaneous (through the skin) or by surgical exposure of the kidney.
A 
nephrectomy
 is the removal of a kidney, either partial or radical
(total). A radical nephrectomy includes removal of the fascia and
surrounding fatty tissue, regional lymph nodes, and the adrenal
gland. The nephrectomy codes (50220-50240) are based on the
complexity and extent of the procedure. Nephrectomies can also be
performed by means of a laparoscope (50543, 50545-50548), based on
whether the procedure was partial, radical, or donor, and whether the
procedure included a partial or total ureterectomy.
Ablation
 is the cutting away or erosion of tissue. Code 50250
reports ablation of a kidney lesion by means of cryosurgery (use of
subfreezing temperatures) and is usually performed with ultrasonic
guidance. If used, the ultrasonic guidance is not reported separately
because it is included in the code description. Monitoring is also
included in the code. The surgeon accesses the kidney through an
incision and inserts a cryosurgical probe into the lesion. The
cryosurgical machine is turned on, and subfreezing temperature is
delivered to the lesion (
Fig. 20-4
). The area is brought back to above
freezing, and the treatment is applied again. At times, more than two
cycles are applied to ensure the lesion is ablated. This procedure can
also be performed percutaneously (50593) or by use of a laparoscope
(50542).
 
FIGURE 20–4
Liquid nitrogen spray.
Renal transplantation. 
Allotransplantation is the transfer of tissue or an organ between two
people who are not related (genetically different). Autotransplantation
is transfer of tissue from one part of a person’s body to another part of
that person’s body, also known as autograft or autotransplant. A
surgeon may perform a renal autotransplant to reposition the kidney,
which may be necessary when the kidney has been severely damaged
from trauma or disease. A renal autotransplantation is reported with
50380. Backbench work is the work involved in preparation for the
transplant surgery and includes:
■
 
Open organ 
retrieval
 from a deceased (50300) or living (50320)
donor; laparoscopic organ retrieval from a living (50547) donor.
■
 
Standard 
preparation
 based on deceased (50323) or living (50325)
donor. As a part of this preparation the surgeon may perform
additional surgery on the organ, such as venous, arterial, or ureteral
anastomosis (50327-50329).
■
 
Allotransplantation
 service reported with 50360 (without
nephrectomy) or 50365 (with nephrectomy) with modifier -50
added for a bilateral procedure
.
If backbench procedures were performed, those services would be
reported in addition to the transplantation service with modifier -51
added to indicate multiple procedures.
 
CODING SHOT
If the recipient requires a nephrectomy, the procedure is reported
separately with 50340 and with modifier -50 for a bilateral procedure.
Introduction. 
Introduction category codes in the Kidney subheading are for
aspiration, catheters, injections for radiography, guides, and tube
changes. There are also extensive notes within the category.
Codes in the range 50382-50389 are percutaneous, transurethral, or
externally accessible procedures that report removal and/or
replacement of renal stents and tubes. These stents are not renal artery
stents but are ureteral stents that are placed through the renal pelvis.
The codes only report a unilateral procedure, so if a bilateral
procedure was performed, add modifier -50.
Imaging guidance is used for the codes in this range and is included
in the code description, so do not report the guidance separately. If
imaging guidance was not used for removal without replacement of
an externally accessible ureteral stent, you would report the removal
with an E/M code.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-2
1. 
An Evaluation and Management (E/M) code is used to report
removal of an ____________ accessible stent when imaging
guidance is not used.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Approximately half of the population over age 50 has renal cysts
that are asymptomatic (no symptoms) and are often only discovered
as an incidental finding on ultrasound or computed tomography.
When these cysts are symptomatic, percutaneous aspiration or
injection may be performed. The procedure is performed by use of
local anesthetic and on an outpatient basis. A sclerosing agent (such as
alcohol) may be injected into the cyst. The code description for 50390
indicates “aspiration and/or injection,” which means if both an
aspiration and injection are performed during the same operative
session, 50390 is reported only one time. Image guidance is not
included in the code description, so any guidance used is reported
separately.
Repair. 
Repair category codes (50400-50540) include plastic surgery
(pyeloplasty), suturing (nephrorrhaphy), and closure of fistula.
Pyeloplasty
 is a surgical procedure for an obstruction of the
ureteropelvic junction (UPJ), which connects the renal pelvis to the
ureter (
Fig. 20-5
). Usually, this is a congenital condition, but it may
also be an acquired condition. If an obstruction occurs the urine will
not drain, which results in dilatation of the collecting system and
enlargement of the renal pelvis (hydronephrosis). The goal of a
pyeloplasty is to remove the obstruction and repair the renal pelvis
(
Fig. 20-6
). As a part of the repair, a nephropexy (surgical fixation of
mobile kidney), nephrostomy (a passageway from the kidney to
exterior of the body), pyelostomy (a passageway between the renal
pelvis and the exterior of the body), and ureteral splinting are
included in the codes for a 
simple
 pyeloplasty (50400). A 
complicated
pyeloplasty (50405) includes all of the procedures in the simple
pyeloplasty, as indicated by the placement of the semicolon in 50400.
(Note that the semicolon is after the term “splinting,” which means
that all 
the terms that precede the semicolon are included in the code
description for the indented code 50405.) In addition to all the
procedures in the simple pyeloplasty, the complicated pyeloplasty is
more difficult, because the procedure may include repair of a
congenital kidney abnormality (which can be an extensive procedure),
further plastic repair of the pelvis of the kidney, repair of a solitary
kidney (patient only has one kidney), or a calycoplasty. A calycoplasty
is repair of the calyx (the cup-shaped structure) of the kidney.
 
FIGURE 20–5
Ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) is the place at which the
ureter joins the kidney at the renal pelvis.
 
FIGURE 20–6
Structure of kidney.
Closures of nephrocutaneous, pyelocutaneous, or nephrovisceral
fistulas (abnormal openings) are reported with codes from the 50520-
50526 range. Code 50520 reports the closure of a fistula between the
renal pelvis and the exterior of the body or of the kidney and the
exterior. Codes 50525 and 50526 report closure of a fistula between the
kidney and another organ, such as the kidney and the bladder. The
approach to close the fistula may be abdominal (50525) or thoracic
(50526).
TOOLBOX 20-1
John, a 43-year-old male patient, presents to his family physician, Dr.
Marsh, with complaints of dull groin pain, an ache on the lower left
side of his back, and a decrease in urinary output. A pyelogram was
ordered and the final diagnosis was hydronephrosis. Antibiotics were
prescribed and John is to return for a follow-up in 30 days.
Questions
1.
 For this diagnosis, would you expect the renal pelvis, renal column,
or renal papilla to be enlarged?_____________________
2.
 When you reference “Pyelogram” in the CPT index, what is the
“See” direction?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Laparoscopy. 
The Laparoscopy codes (50541-50549) report ablation of renal cysts
(50541) or lesions (50542). Open cryosurgical ablation of renal tumors
is reported with 50250, and percutaneous ablation is reported with
50593.
Laparoscopic nephrectomies and pyeloplasty are also reported with
codes from the Laparoscopy category and are based on the extent of
the procedure.
Endoscopy. 
Endoscopy codes (50551-50580) are frequently reported for kidney
procedures, because these types of procedures are less invasive than
the open procedures and are often performed in an outpatient setting.
Renal endoscopies may be performed by means of an established
connection between the kidney and the exterior of the body. The
codes in the Endoscopy category are divided into those procedures
performed through an established nephrostomy or pyelostomy and
those that are not. For example, 50555 reports a renal endoscopy
through an established nephrostomy/pyelostomy, and 50574 reports
the same endoscopic biopsy but not through a
nephrostomy/pyelostomy. The codes are further divided based on the
reason for the procedure: ureteral catheterization, biopsy, fulguration,
or foreign body/calculus removal or tumor resection.
The code descriptions in the Endoscopy category code descriptions
state “exclusive of radiologic service,” which means that the
radiologic services are reported in addition to the endoscopic
procedures. If, for example, a biopsy (50555) is performed with
ultrasound, you would report the biopsy procedure in addition to the
ultrasound.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-3
1. 
Renal Endoscopy codes 50551-50562 are reported when the scope is
inserted through an established ___________________ or
___________________ opening.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Kidney index locations. 
You will locate the kidney codes in the CPT manual index under
“Kidney”; they are subtermed primarily by category (e.g., insertion,
excision, or repair). Another method of locating kidney codes in the
CPT manual index is to reference the medical term for the procedure
(e.g., nephrostomy or nephrotomy). Again, there are other index
location methods; these are just a couple to help you get started
locating the codes.
The following kidney codes or code ranges are unilateral and
require modifier -50 if the procedure was performed bilaterally:
50080-50081, 50120-50135
Incision
50200-50230
Excision
50320, 50340, 50360, 50365
Renal Transplantation
50382-50390, 50432-50435
Introduction
50545-50547, 50549
Laparoscopy
50551-50561, 50570-50580
Endoscopy
50590, 50592
Other Procedures
The third-party payer may require reporting modifiers -RT and -LT
rather than modifier -50.
EXERCISE 20-1
Kidney
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Repeat nephrolithotomy
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
The patient presents for a nephrostomy tube exchange. The patient
was placed prone on the angiographic table and has pre-existing left
nephrostomy tube. The patient did not receive conscious sedation.
The back was prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion. A
guidewire was advanced through the nephrostomy tube. The tube
was exchanged, and the tube was secured to the skin with suture.
CPT Code: ___________________
3
 The patient presents with right renal calculus with stent for a right
ESWL, cystoscopy, and stent removal. The patient was placed on
the lithotripsy table and administered a general anesthetic. The
stone was targeted, shock head engaged. Total of 2400 shocks at
maximum kV of 24 were administered to the stone. Good
fragmentation was noted. The patient was then prepped and
draped in the supine position. The urethra was anesthetized with
2% Xylocaine jelly. The patient was cystoscoped with the flexible
instrument; stent was visualized, grasped, and removed intact.
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
 
(Answers are located in
Appendix B
)
Ureter
The next subheading (50600-50980) in the Urinary System subsection
is Ureter. The codes are based on the procedure (i.e., incision, excision,
introduction, repairs, laparoscopy, or endoscopy). The ureter is the
tube that leads from the kidney to the bladder and may be the site of
an assortment of conditions, such as obstruction by calculus, cysts, or
lesions in addition to reflux, congenital abnormalities, and fistulas.
Incision/biopsy. 
The Incision/Biopsy codes (50600-50630) report open procedures to
explore or drain (50600), insert indwelling stent (50605), and removal
of calculus (ureterolithotomy) based on the location of the calculus as
upper third, middle third, or lower third of the ureter (50610-50630).
The incisional procedures also have laparoscopic, endoscopic, and/or
transvesical counterparts. For example, to report a laparoscopic
ureterolithotomy of the upper third of the ureter, report 50945, and for
an incisional ureterolithotomy, report 50610. It is very important to
check the documentation for the method utilized for the procedure to
ensure selection of the correct code.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-4
1. 
Laparoscopic ureterolithotomy is reported with code
____________________, regardless of which portion of the ureter is
involved.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Excision. 
The codes in the Excision category (50650, 50660) report ureterectomy
either with bladder cuff or a total excision. The 
bladder cuff
 is the
tissue that connects the ureter to the bladder, and the excision of the
bladder cuff is only reported if it is the only procedure performed
during the surgical session. A total ureterectomy may be performed
by means of an abdominal, vaginal, or perineal approach or a
combination of the three approaches. Code 50660 includes all three
approaches or a combination of approaches. This means that if two or
three approaches were utilized, you still only report 50660 one time.
Introduction. 
The Introduction codes (50684-50695) include injection procedures,
manometric studies (see paragraph below), and change of tubes
and/or stents. Code 50684 reports an 
injection
 procedure performed
through an indwelling catheter to determine the status of the renal
collecting system. The physician injects a contrast agent through the
catheter and an x-ray is taken. The radiological supervision and
interpretation is reported separately with 74425.
Manometric studies
 (50686) are tests to measure kidney and ureter
flow and pressure. The study is conducted by means of a machine
(manometer) through an access site, which is connected to an
ureterostomy or ureteral catheter filled with fluid. A tube carrying
sterile fluid is inserted through the access site and into the kidney or
bladder and the area is flooded. The pressures and flow are then
measured and recorded.
Repair. 
Repair procedures (50700-50940) includes ureteroplasty (plastic repair
of the ureter), ureterolysis (freeing of fibrous tissue),
ureteropyelostomy (connection of upper ureter to renal pelvis),
ureterocalicostomy (connection of upper ureter to renal calyx), and
ureteroureterostomy (bypass of obstructed ureter), in addition to
numerous other procedures to repair the ureter.
 
CAUTION 
Watch the Repair codes for use of modifier -50! Unless stated, the procedure
is unilateral and requires modifier -50 for bilateral procedures.
Laparoscopy. 
Laparoscopic ureter codes 50947 and 50948 report the placement of a
ureteral stent, which may be performed in conjunction with or
without cystoscopy. The stent is placed because of an obstruction of
the ureterovesical junction (UVJ). The surgeon laparoscopically
repositions the ureter on the bladder and then by means of the
cystoscope places the ureteral stent.
Endoscopy. 
The Endoscopy codes (50951-50980) report procedures that are
performed through an established stoma (ureterostomy, 50951-50961)
or through an incision into the ureter (ureterotomy, 50970-50980). The
procedures conducted through a ureterostomy are similar to the types
of procedures conducted through a nephrostomy (e.g., 50551-50562,
biopsy, catheterization, irrigation, and instillation). Excellent medical
terminology skills are essential for working within this subheading,
because the words can be intimidating. Keep your medical dictionary
close by to look up any words you are not absolutely sure about. You
can also refer to the Glossary at the back of the book. The time you
spend now increasing the depth and breadth of your medical
terminology is an excellent investment and will greatly increase your
coding accuracy.
The endoscopy procedures are for irrigation, instillation,
catheterization, biopsy, fulguration, and foreign body or calculus
removal. The procedures often utilize radiological services, but these
services are reported separately. Note that the stand-alone code
descriptions in the category (50951, 50970) indicate that the service is
“exclusive of radiologic service,” meaning that you report those
services in addition to the procedure. This also means that all
indented codes that follow 50951 and 50970 do not include radiologic
services.
When a ureterocystography is performed, the physician injects a
radioactive contrast material through a catheter inserted into the
bladder via the urethra or through a previously established stoma.
The injection procedure is reported in addition to the primary
procedure. For example, if the procedure was an endoscopic biopsy of
the right ureter through an established stoma, you would report
50955-RT and the injection procedure would be reported with 50684-
RT. In addition to the primary and injection procedures, you also
report the radiological supervision and interpretation with a
Radiology code. For example, 74425 reports retrograde urography.
Retrograde urography is performed by injecting contrast directly into
the lower end of the system, and the contrast flows backwards
through the system allowing for visualization of the tract.
CMS RULES
According to CMS, 50955 and 50684 cannot be reported together as
CMS bundles these codes. Only if 50684 is a uniquely distinct
procedure could you report it with 50955. You must add modifier -59
to the 50684 code. Refer to 
Fig. 20-7
 for an example of the codes that
are bundled into 50955. This figure illustrates that 50684 is bundled
into 50955. In the far right column, the number 1 indicates that the
code can be reported separately with modifier -59 (distinct
procedure) added, and the 0 indicates that the code cannot be
reported with -59 and is always bundled with the primary code.
 
FIGURE 20–7
Codes bundled into 50955.
The following ureter codes or code ranges are unilateral and require
modifier -50 if the procedure was performed bilaterally:
50601-50630
Incision
50684
Introduction
50715
Repair
50780-50800, 50815, 50820
Repair
50840, 50860, 50940
Repair
50945-50980
Laparoscopy/Endoscopy
The third-party payer may require reporting modifiers -RT and -LT
rather than modifier -50.
EXERCISE 20-2
Ureter
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Ureterolithotomy of the lower one-third of the left ureter
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
Bilateral ureteroneocystostomy
CPT Code: ___________________
3 
Ureteral endoscopic biopsy through an established right
ureterostomy with injection of contrast
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________, ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Bladder
The Bladder subheading (51020-52700) contains codes not only for the
usual services, such as incision and excision, but also for some unique
services such as urodynamics and procedures performed on the
prostate. Review the anatomy of the bladder in 
Fig. 20-8
.
 
FIGURE 20–8
Bladder anatomy.
Incision. 
Cystotomy
 (51020-51045) is often performed to fulgurate (use of
electric current), insert radioactive material, or cryosurgically to
destroy a lesion. In addition, the procedure is used for drainage,
placement of catheter/stent, or a cystolithotomy (removal of calculus).
A cystolithotomy reported with 51050 is one in which an incision is
made in the skin and into the bladder. The physician removes the
calculus through the incision but does not excise the bladder neck. A
transvesical ureterolithotomy described in 51060 is a similar
procedure to 51050, but the calculus is removed through an incision in
the bladder and the ureter. The ureter calculus is removed by basket
extract through an incision in 51065, and in some cases the calculus is
first fragmented by ultrasound or electrohydraulic means.
Electrohydraulic fragmentation is the use of a probe containing two
electrodes that are applied, one on each side of the calculus. Electrical
current is then directed through the electrodes, which fragments the
calculus.
Removal. 
Aspiration
 of urine from the bladder may be accomplished by means
of needle, trocar (a sharply pointed surgical instrument), or
intracatheter (plastic tube with a needle on the end). A suprapubic
(above the pubic bone) catheter may also be inserted during the
aspiration service (51102). Aspirations are often performed by means
of imaging guidance, which is reported separately. If imaging
guidance is used, report the guidance separately with 76942, 77002, or
77012.
Excision. 
A 
urachal cyst
 is between the umbilicus and bladder dome and is
often diagnosed in young children when the cyst becomes infected.
Because of the proximity to the abdominal cavity and potential to
rupture, a urachal cyst is a condition that warrants prompt medical
attention. A urachal sinus is a congenital abnormality in which
prenatal tissue remains, causes drainage to the umbilicus, and results
in infection. The excision of a urachal cyst or sinus is reported with
51500 and may or may not include umbilical hernia repair.
Cystotomies and cystectomies (51520-51596) are performed for a
variety of reasons, such as excision of a portion of or all of the bladder,
repair of a ureterocele, or to replant a ureter into the bladder. The
codes are divided based on the extent of the procedure. If the
procedure is performed transurethrally, such as a bladder resection,
codes from the Transurethral Surgery category (52204-52318) would
be reported.
Pelvic exenteration (51597) is also known as total pelvic
exenteration (TPE) and is the removal of the pelvic organs and
adjacent structures due to malignancy. If TPE is performed due to
gynecologic malignancy, report the service with the Female Genital
system code 58240. A hysterectomy may be performed with 51597, but
the initial and primary reason the procedure is being performed is for
other than a gynecological malignancy.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-5
1. 
Pelvic exenteration is reported with 51597, unless the diagnosis is a
gynecologic malignancy, then code ____________________ should
be reported.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Introduction. 
The 
injection
 procedures reported with codes 51600-51610 are for
urethrocystography (x-ray of lower urinary tract, also known as a
cystourethroscopy). The radiological supervision and interpretation
are reported in addition to the injection procedure. Note that the
parenthetical statements after each of the injection codes direct the
coder to the correct radiology code(s).
Insertion
 of bladder catheters may be non-indwelling (51701) or
temporary indwelling (51702, 51703). The non-indwelling catheter is
the type that is inserted into the urethra and manipulated into the
bladder to drain residual urine. The temporary indwelling procedure
can be a simple catheterization (such as with a Foley) or a complicated
catheterization due to an anatomical anomaly.
Catheter fracturing may occur, for example, when a patient pulls
the catheter out while the balloon is still inflated. This is a rare
complication and does not describe the insertion but rather why it was
necessary to reinsert another catheter.
Instillation
 is a procedure that is performed for bladder cancer. An
anticarcinogenic agent is introduced into the bladder by means of a
catheter. For example, immunotherapy is the instillation of a
nonactive tuberculosis agent into the bladder. The agent is retained in
the bladder for a period of time (such as 1 hour) with the patient in a
supine position. The agent is then drained and the treatment is
concluded. A series of these instillations is performed in a course of
treatment. Code 51720 reports the instillation as well as the retention
time and drainage.
Urodynamics. 
Urodynamics pertains to the motion and flow of urine. Urinary tract
flow can be obstructed by renal calculi, narrowing (stricture) of the
ureter, cysts, and so forth. The procedures in the Urodynamics
subheading (51725-51798) are to be conducted by or under the direct
supervision of a physician, and all the instruments, equipment,
supplies, and technical assistance necessary to conduct the procedure
are bundled into the codes. If the physician performs only the
professional service (e.g., interpretation of the results), modifier -26
(professional component) is reported with the code to indicate that the
technical portion of the service (performance of test or tests) was
provided elsewhere. For example, if a physician provides only the
interpretation (-26) of a complex urethral pressure profile (UPP)
(51727), report only the professional component of the service as
51727-26.
Repair and laparoscopy. 
Repair procedures (51800-51980) include procedures such as
cystoplasty (bladder repair), cystourethroplasty (bladder and urethra),
vesicourethropexy/urethropexy (repair for urinary incontinence), and
closure of fistulas.
Stress incontinence may be surgically repaired by a
colposuspension procedure in which a urethral sling is placed to
support and elevate the urethra. There are several types of these sling
procedures, such as the Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz (MMK), Burch,
paravaginal repair, anterior vesicourethropexy, or urethropexy. These
procedures are reported with 51840 for a simple procedure and 51841
for a complicated repair, which would include a secondary repair of
the bladder. The urethral suspension and sling operation are also
performed by means of laparoscopy (51990, 51992). A sling operation
for stress incontinence is also reported with 57288 when vaginal and
abdominal incisions are used. A Pereyra procedure (57289) is also
known as a needle bladder neck suspension in which sutures are used
to support and anchor the bladder. The codes (57287-57289) are in the
Female Genital System subsection, Vagina subheading, because the
procedure includes repair of the vagina. There are also codes in the
Urethra subsection (53431-53442) that refer to the creation, removal, or
revision of a sling operation for male urinary incontinence and plastic
repair of the bladder for incontinence.
Endoscopy. 
There are codes (52000-52010) for bundled endoscopy procedures (i.e.,
cystoscopy, urethroscopy, and cystourethroscopy). The codes contain
the primary procedure of a cystourethroscopy (endoscopic procedure
to view the bladder and urethra) and minor related procedures
performed at the same time. For example, if a cystourethroscopy is
performed for the biopsy of the ureter with radiography, bundled into
the code for the procedure (52007) are the catheterization, endoscopic
procedure, and biopsy(ies). To unbundle the code and report the
individual components of the procedure separately would not be
correct. If the secondary procedure(s) required significant additional
time or effort that is documented in the medical record, the procedure
can be identified using modifier -22 (increased procedure). There are
combination codes that include many components of a procedure
bundled into one code. For example, 52005 reports a
cystourethroscopy with ureteral catheterization, with/without
irrigation, instillation, or ureteropyelography with the one code. Be
careful to read each description in this category before assigning a
code to be certain you have identified each component included in the
code before you assign additional codes. For example, you cannot
report a cystourethroscopy (52005) with a catheterization (51701)
because a catheterization is included in the code description for 52005.
Many third-party payers, such as CMS, have lists of codes (edits) that
cannot be reported with other codes. For example, 52000
(cystourethroscopy) cannot be reported with 51701 (catheterization),
even though catheterization is not stated in the code description. You
need to know not only the limitations set by the notes and codes in the
CPT manual but also the limitations set by the third-party payer.
 
CODING SHOT
For a complete list of the CMS Correct Coding Initiative (CCI) edits,
check out 
www.cms.gov/NationalCorrectCodInitEd/
.
A cystourethroscopy is a diagnostic procedure to assess lower
urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), such as incontinence or benign
prostate hypertrophy (BPH). The procedure is reported only if it is
performed as the only procedure during the operative session,
because it is designated a separate procedure.
 
CODING SHOT
Usually, third-party payers will not reimburse for more than two
cystourethroscopic procedures per episode of illness unless bladder
or urethral malignancies are being treated.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-6
1. 
To locate endoscopy codes in the CPT index, use the main terms
____________________, ___________________, or cystourethroscopy.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Transurethral surgery. 
Transurethral Surgery codes (52204-52355) are for the urethra/bladder
(52204-52318) and ureter/pelvis (52320-52355).
Code 52204 reports a cystourethroscopy with biopsy and 52000 is
also a cystourethroscopy. The difference is that 52000 is a diagnostic
procedure only. No additional procedure was performed when
reporting 52000. When reporting 52204, a biopsy was performed, so
the procedure was not only diagnostic but also a surgical procedure.
The procedure may have begun as a diagnostic procedure, but it
progressed to a biopsy on identification of a lesion. The diagnostic
procedure is then bundled into the surgical procedure and not
reported separately.
 
CODING SHOT
Many third-party payers will bundle 52204 (cystourethroscopy) into
many major procedures. For example, Medicare bundles the
cystourethroscopy into the transurethral resection of a bladder tumor
(52234-52240).
A 
transurethral resection of a bladder tumor
 (TURBT) is a
procedure in which a bladder tumor is removed by fulguration
(electric current) or excision. Note that the code descriptions 52234-
52240 contain multiple methods of removal of the bladder tumor, that
is, “with fulguration (including cryosurgery or laser surgery) and/or
resection.” If any, or a combination of, these methods has been used to
eradicate the tumor, you can assign a 
code based on the 
size
 of the
bladder tumor. The code description indicates the size as small (0.5-2.0
cm), medium (2.0-5.0 cm), and large (>5 cm). Code 52224 is a
cystourethroscopy with fulguration or treatment of a minor (<0.5 cm)
lesion(s). The lesion(s) are treated with fulguration (electrocautery),
cryosurgery or a laser. This procedure may or may not include a
biopsy prior to eradication.
Many of the code descriptions require the coder to be familiar with
the anatomy of the bladder and surrounding structures, for example,
52214 (cystourethroscopy) with fulguration (including cryosurgery or
laser surgery) of trigone, bladder neck, prostatic fossa, urethra, or
periurethral glands. Refer to 
Fig. 20-8
 for bladder anatomy and
location of the trigone and bladder neck. To code correctly the coder
also needs to know the anatomy surrounding the bladder, such as the
prostatic fossa, which is the depression or cavity (prostatic bed) in
which the prostate is located.
The codes in the Ureter and Pelvis subsection (52320-52355) all
include insertion and removal of temporary stents during the
procedure, even though the code descriptions may not all state that
fact. You know this only when you read the notes preceding code
52320. That does not mean that insertion and/or removal of temporary
stents cannot be reported with other procedures, such as ESWL
(50590), only that temporary stents are not reported separately with
the codes in the 52320-52355 range. Make a note in your CPT manual
next to this range of codes stating “includes insertion/removal of
temporary stents” as a reminder of this important point or highlight
the paragraph in the notes preceding code 52320 (“The insertion and
removal of a temporary ureteral catheter.
 
.
 
.
 
.”). Insertion of indwelling
stents is reported separately with 52332-51 in addition to the primary
procedure. Code 52332 reports 
insertion
 of unilateral stents, so
modifiers to indicate bilateral procedures were performed would also
be needed; for example, 52332-51-50. To report 
removal
 of indwelling
stents, use 52310 (simple removal) or 52315 (complicated removal)
with modifier -58 (staged or related procedure or service by same
individual during the postoperative period). It is a good idea to place
a bracket next to codes 52310 and 52315 and write “-58” as a reminder
of how to report these codes, because the direction for the use of this
modifier is located in notes before code 52320.
Vesical neck and prostate. 
The Vesical Neck and Prostate codes 52400-52700 contain codes to
report cystourethroscopy and transurethral procedures. Many of these
codes are reviewed in the Male Genital System information because
many of these procedures are of the prostate with access through the
urethra, such as 52450, transurethral incision of the prostate.
When the procedure is a transurethral 
resection
 of the bladder
neck, report 52500. If a transurethral 
incision
 of the bladder neck is
performed, report 52276 (Bladder, Urethrotomy).
The following bladder codes or code ranges are unilateral and
require modifier -50 if the procedure was performed bilaterally:
52007
Endoscopy/Cystoscopy, Urethroscopy and Cystourethroscopy
52320-52344, 52352-52355
Ureter and Pelvis
The third-party payer may require reporting modifiers -RT and -LT
rather than modifier -50.
EXERCISE 20-3
Bladder
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Needle aspiration of bladder
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
Endoscopy for establishment of a right Gibbons ureteral stent
CPT Code: ___________________
3 
Cystoscopy, left retrograde pyelogram using contrast, under
fluoroscopic control, insertion of left ureteral stent
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
4 
The patient has been diagnosed with incontinence and presents for
an urethropexy. The patient was brought to the operating room and
placed on the operating table in the supine position, prepped, and
draped. A small horizontal incision is made in the abdomen just
above the symphysis pubis. The bladder was then suspended by
placing sutures bilaterally at the mid-portion of the urethra 1 cm
lateral and at the bladder neck 2 cm lateral. The sutures were then
suspended to the Cooper’s ligament bilaterally. The urethra was
then elevated to the horizontal position.
CPT Code: ___________________
5 
The 33-year-old patient has postoperative diagnosis of left ureteral
calculus and presents for a cystoscopy, bilateral retrograde
pyelograms, left ureteroscopy, and stone extraction. The patient was
cystoscoped using a 21-French instrument. There was no evidence
of urethral or bladder abnormality. Bilateral retrograde pyelograms
were performed that indicated normal collecting system of the
right-hand side. There was only a minimal suggestion of a filling
defect in the distal ureter on the left. A guidewire was advanced up
the ureter under fluoroscopic control and then a rigid short
ureteroscope followed this. A stone was visualized and was
entrapped in a basket and withdrawn under visual guidance.
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Urethra
The subheading Urethra contains codes (53000-53899) for the usual
procedures of incision, excision, and repair. For endoscopic
procedures of the urethra, refer to codes 52000-52700, which contain
cystoscopy, urethroscopy, and cystourethroscopy procedures.
If the physician performs the injection procedure for radiology
studies for examination of the urethra, report 51600-51610 based on
the type of study being performed. The radiological supervision and
interpretation is reported separately with 74430 (cystography), 74450
(retrograde urethrocystography), or 74455 (voiding
urethrocystography).
Incision. 
A meatotomy is surgical incision of the meatus, which is the opening
of the urethra to the outside of the body (urethral meatus). This
procedure is often bundled into other more major procedures. Codes
53020 (except infant) and 53025 (infant) report a meatotomy if it is
performed as a separate procedure. Because 53025 is specifically for
infants, do not append modifier -63 (Procedure performed on infants
less than 4 kg).
The 
Skene’s glands
 are also known as the paraurethral or the lesser
vestibular glands and are located on either side of the urethra. These
glands drain into the urethra near the meatus (urethral opening).
When infected, the gland will become enlarged and tender and may
require drainage or excision. 
Drainage
 of an abscess or cyst of the
Skene’s glands is reported with 53060. 
Excision
 of the Skene’s glands
is reported with code 53270.
Excision. 
The Excision category of codes (53200-53275) includes services such as
biopsy, urethrectomy, lesion excision, fulguration, and
marsupialization (creating a pouch).
When the urethra is totally surgically removed (urethrectomy), the
service is reported with 53210 for a female and 53215 for a male. A
urethrectomy involves removal of the urethra and creation of an
opening from the bladder to the skin that is then used to drain urine.
The 
procedure would include removal of any tumors of the urethra. If
the urethra was not removed and only the tumor was removed, report
with 53220.
The bulbourethral gland is also known as the Cowper’s gland and is
a pair of glands about the size of a pea located beneath the prostate.
These glands secrete a fluid that forms part of the semen and drains
directly into the urethra. Excision of the bulbourethral gland is
reported with 53250.
Repair. 
A urethroplasty may be completed in one stage or two stages (53400-
53431). The choice of codes to report a urethroplasty is based on the
number of stages and type of repair. Codes 53420 (first stage) and
53425 (second stage) report the two stages of an urethroplasty, and
53415 reports a one-stage urethroplasty.
A tandem cuff or dual cuff is an artificial urinary sphincter (AUS)
that is placed due to atrophy, disease, or defect of the urinary
sphincter and reported with 53444. An artificial sphincter is inflatable
and includes a pump, reservoir, and cuff, is inserted through a
subpubic incision, and is illustrated in 
Fig. 20-9
. The small switch in
the scrotum can be manipulated to activate the pump and control
urinary continence. Codes 53446-53448 report the removal and/or
replacement of an AUS system, and 53449 reports repair of a
previously placed system.
 
FIGURE 20–9
The cuff on the urethra squeezes the urethra closed.
Urethromeatoplasty
 is repair of the meatus and the urethra (53450,
53460) and is performed to open and/or reconstruct the urethra.
Manipulation. 
The Manipulation category codes (53600-53665) are a bit different
from those you have encountered previously. Manipulation is
performed on the urethra (e.g., dilation or catheterization). Dilation
stretches or dilates a passage that has narrowed. The Dilation codes
are based on initial or subsequent dilation of a male or female patient.
EXERCISE 20-4
Urethra
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Closure of a urethrostomy in a 54-year-old man
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
Second stage, surgical reconstruction of the urethra, with urinary
diversion
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Male genital system
Format
The Male Genital System subsection (54000-55899) of the CPT manual
is divided into anatomic subheadings (penis, testis, epididymis, tunica
vaginalis, scrotum, vas deferens, spermatic cord, seminal vesicles, and
prostate) 
(Fig. 20-10).
 The category codes are divided according to
procedure. The greatest number of category codes are under the
subheading Penis because there are many repair codes in this
subheading. The other subheadings are primarily for incision and
excision, with only a few repair codes for the remaining subheadings.
 
 
FIGURE 20–10
A,
 Male genital system. 
B,
 Testis.
Penis
Incisions. 
Under the Incision category (54000-54015) of the subheading Penis,
there is an incision and drainage code (54015). Recall that under the
Integumentary System section there are incision and drainage codes.
The code from the Penis subheading is for a deep incision, not just an
abscess of the skin. For the deep abscess described in 54015, the area is
anesthetized, the abscess is opened and cleaned, and often a drain is
placed to maintain adequate drainage.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-7
1. 
For a superficial incision and drainage of the penis, you would
select a code from the ____________ System subsection of the CPT
manual.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Destruction. 
Under the Destruction category (54050-54065) of the subheading Penis
there are also destruction codes for lesions of the penis. These lesion
destruction codes are divided on the basis of whether the destruction
is simple or extensive. Simple destruction is further divided according
to the method of destruction (e.g., chemical, cryosurgery, laser). The
code for extensive lesion destruction can be reported no matter which
method was employed to accomplish the extensive destruction.
Excision. 
Excision codes (54100-54164) include codes to report biopsy of the
penis (54100, 54105). Note that 54100 has a designation of “separate
procedure,” which means that the code is reported when the biopsy
was the only procedure performed during the operative session. To
accomplish the biopsy, the physician removes a portion of a lesion by
excision of a small section of the lesion (scalpel or scissors) or by a
punch biopsy. A punch biopsy is commonly used with skin lesions
and is performed with an instrument that is pencil-shaped 
(Fig. 20-11)
that removes a round disk of tissue. The opening left by the punch
may require simple closure (suture) depending on the size of the skin
defect created by the biopsy. A more complex biopsy (54105) of the
penis involves the deeper layers of the penis and may require layered
closure, which is reported separately.
 
FIGURE 20–11
A punch biopsy is used for deeper lesions and the
area may require closure.
Peyronie’s disease
 is a curvature of the penis that results from
plaque formation on the cavernous sheaths of the penis as illustrated
in 
Fig. 20-12
. The plaque develops on the lower and upper side of the
penis where the erectile tissue is located. Inflammation results and
leads to the formation of scar tissue. Over time, this fibrous plaque
bends the penis. In severe cases, the penis arches during erection,
causing pain. Surgical correction of the curvature involves removal of
the penile plaque (54110-54112). Grafting of the defect may be
necessary, depending on the extent of the removal. Code 54110
reports the excision of penile plaque when no grafting is required and
54111/54112 report excision when grafting is required.
 
FIGURE 20–12
Curvature of penis due to Peyronie’s disease.
Penile amputation
 can occur as a result of trauma or as a surgical
procedure for penile cancer. If the procedure is the removal of only
the penis (partial or complete), report the service with 54120 or 54125.
If the procedure includes removal of the inguinofemoral lymph nodes,
report the service based on the extent of the removal (54130, 54135).
Circumcision
 codes 54150-54161 are divided based on whether the
circumcision was accomplished by means of a clamp/other device or
surgical excision and whether the procedure was performed on a
neonate or non-neonate. A clamp is a device that is used to restrain
the foreskin of the penis while the skin is trimmed. Report newborn
circumcisions 
that utilize a clamp or other device with 54150. Surgical
excision of the foreskin is a procedure in which a clamp or other
device is not used, and the surgeon directly excises the skin from the
penis. Once the skin has been removed, the incision is closed with
sutures. Report the surgical excision without the use of a clamp or
other device with 54160 (neonate) or 54161 (except neonate).
 
QUICK CHECK 20-8
1. 
Circumcision code 54160 is assigned for infants aged ____________
days or less.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Introduction. 
Introduction codes (54200-54250) report various injection procedures,
irrigations, plethysmography, and other tests. An example would be
an injection procedure for Peyronie’s disease in which steroids are
injected into the fibrous tissue of the penis to decrease pain,
deformity, and fibrous tissue size. There are two ways the fibrous
tissue can be injected: the first way is to inject steroids directly into the
area of the lump formed by the fibrous tissue (54200), and the second
way is to expose the fibrous tissue through an incision and then inject
steroids into the fibrous tissue (54205).
Priapism
 is a state of prolonged erection that can last from hours to
days because of the inability of the blood to flow from the penis,
which returns the penis to a flaccid state. The condition may be
caused by medications used to treat impotence, such as sildenafil
citrate (Viagra) or medical conditions, such as leukemia, multiple
myeloma, or tumor infiltrate. If medical intervention is necessary, the
surgeon introduces a large needle into the corpus cavernosum and
aspirates blood, which is keeping the penis erect. The corpus
cavernosum is then irrigated with a saline solution. The entire
procedure is reported with 54220.
Repair. 
Repair category (54300-54440) codes are for various repairs made to
the penis. The code descriptions often state the condition for which
the procedure is being performed. For example, 54304 is plastic repair
for correction of chordee or a first-stage hypospadias (defined in next
paragraph) repair, and 54380 is plastic repair for epispadias. Many
other codes also indicate the stage of the procedure.
Many of the Repair codes refer to repair of chordee and
hypospadias. 
Chordee
 is a condition in which the penis has a ventral
(downward) curve and is a congenital deformity. 
Hypospadias
 is a
congenital abnormality in which the urethral meatus (opening) is
abnormally placed, usually along the ventral aspect (underside) of the
shaft. Degrees of hypospadias are classified according to location:
anterior, middle, or posterior. Hypospadias may lead to chordee. The
farther from the glans penis the opening is, the greater the chordee.
Read the code descriptions for Repair codes carefully as many of the
descriptions have only slight differences.
Codes in the range 54400-54417 report insertion, repair, or removal
of various types of penile prostheses. The codes are divided based on
the type of service and often on the circumstances of the service.
Erectile dysfunction (impotence) is a condition in which the penis
does not become erect. Impotence may be caused by a variety of
conditions, such as obesity, chronic illness, or as a result of
medication. One surgical solution to impotence is insertion of a 
penile
implant
. There are various types of penile implants, but mainly there
are two broad categories: non-inflatable (malleable or semi-rigid,
54400) and inflatable (54401). These implants are inserted deep within
the penile tissue. If the implant is subsequently removed, the removal
procedure is reported with 54406 (inflatable) or 54115 (non-inflatable).
On occasion, removal and replacement are accomplished during the
same operative session. Removal of a previously placed prosthesis
with insertion of a new prosthesis during the same operative session
is reported with 54410, 54411 (inflatable), or 54416/54417 (non-
inflatable).
 
QUICK CHECK 20-9
1. 
When coding for penile prostheses the code selection is determined
by the type of implant, which may be ___________________ or
___________________, and the type of service insertion, repair,
removal, and/or replacement.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 20-5
Penis
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Extensive electrodesiccation of a condyloma on the penis
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Patient presents for removal of a previously implanted semi-rigid
penile implant
CPT Code: ____________________
 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Testis
Excision. 
The Excision category (54500-54535) codes report services such as
biopsy, excision, orchiectomy, and exploration of the testis. Biopsies
may be percutaneous (54500) or incisional (54505). If an incisional
biopsy of the testis is performed bilaterally, report modifier -50 with
54505.
Extraparenchymal is defined as unrelated to the essential elements
of an organ. Removal of an extraparenchymal lesion of the testis is
reported with 54512. An incision is made on the scrotum, and the
testicle is pulled out through the incision where the tunica vaginalis is
opened and the lesion is removed. The testicle is returned to the
scrotum and the area is sutured closed.
An 
orchiectomy
 is the removal of a testis. CPT codes 54520-54535
report orchiectomies based on if the procedure was simple/radical,
unilateral/bilateral, with/without testicular prosthesis insertion, and
the approach used to gain access to the site. Watch for codes that
specify unilateral or bilateral. For example, a simple orchiectomy with
or without testicular prosthesis insertion (54520) reports a unilateral
procedure. When the procedure is bilateral, modifier -50 must be
added to correctly report the procedure.
Exploration, repair, and laparoscopy. 
Undescended testis (cryptorchidism) is a congenital condition in
which the testis(es) did not descend into the scrotal sac. The condition
may be unilateral or bilateral. The testis(es) may remain in the
abdominal, inguinal, or prescrotal areas or may move back and forth
between areas. Often, undescended testis is associated with a hernia,
and if this was the case, during the hernia repair procedure, the
undescended testis is brought down into the scrotum and anchored
with sutures (orchiopexy). An exploration may be necessary to locate
the undescended testis(es), and the choice of codes (54550, 54560) is
determined based on the approach used (inguinal/scrotal or
abdominal) to gain access to the area. The exploration codes report a
unilateral procedure, so if a bilateral procedure was performed, add
modifier -50. During an exploration, when no more definitive
procedure is performed, it is only reported as an exploration. If the
testis was located during the exploration and the surgeon moved the
testis into the scrotal sac, the procedure is no longer an exploration but
a corrective procedure (orchiopexy). An orchiopexy is reported with
codes from the Repair category or the Laparoscopy category,
depending on the technique used. 
An orchiopexy in which the
operative site is opened to the surgeon’s view is reported with 54640
or 54650, depending on whether the approach was inguinal or
abdominal. If the orchiopexy is performed laparoscopically, report the
procedure with 54692.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-10
1. 
If during an exploratory procedure the testis is located and moved
to the scrotal sac, the procedure becomes this corrective procedure:
___________________.
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
The following testes code ranges are unilateral and require modifier
-50 if the procedure was performed bilaterally:
54500-54535
Excision
54550-54560
Exploration
54640-54680
Repair
54690-54692
Laparoscopy
The third-party payer may require reporting modifiers -RT and -LT
rather than modifier -50.
EXERCISE 20-6
Testis
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Simple bilateral orchiectomy with insertion of prosthesis using
scrotal approach
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
The diagnosis is azoospermia and the procedure bilateral testicular
biopsies. The patient was given a general mask anesthetic, prepped
and draped in supine position. Bilateral testicular cord blocks were
performed. Beginning on the right side, a scrotal incision was made.
The tunica vaginalis was identified, opened, and a stay stitch placed
in the testis. A small incision was made, tubules delivered, resected,
and sent for permanent section. The testis, vaginalis, and skin were
closed with 3-0 chromic. The procedure was repeated in identical
fashion on the contralateral side.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Epididymis
The 
epididymis
 is a narrow, coiled tube located on the top of the
testes that connects the efferent ducts at the back of each testicle to the
vas deferens. The epididymis is divided into the caput (head), corpus
(body), and cauda (tail). The epididymis can become infected,
inflamed, or obstructed. When an abscess or hematoma forms in the
epididymis, the surgeon may incise and drain the area (54700). At
times, the testis, scrotal space, and epididymis are the site of abscess
or hematoma. When any or all of these areas are incised and drained,
the service is reported with 54700. For example, if the surgeon incised
and drained the scrotal space, the service is reported with 54700. Or, if
the surgeon incised and drained the testis, scrotal space, and
epididymis, the service is reported with 54700. The one code reports
incision and drainage of each or all of the areas.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-11
1. 
Code ___________________ is used to report incision and drainage
of abscess or hematoma of the testis, scrotal space, and/or
epididymis.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Excision. 
The Excision category (54800-54861) of the Epididymis codes reports
biopsy, exploration (with/without biopsy), lesion or spermatocele
excision, and unilateral or bilateral removal. A spermatocele is a cyst
that contains sperm, and during the excision of the cyst the
epididymis may or may not be removed depending on the damage to
the area caused by the presence of the cyst. Code 54840 reports the
excision of a spermatocele with or without an epididymectomy.
Repair. 
Repair to the epididymis is an 
epididymovasostomy
. During
epididymovasostomy, the epididymis is connected to the vas
deferens. The surgical procedure is reported with 54900 or 54901,
depending if the procedure was unilateral or bilateral. An operating
microscope is often used during this procedure and reported
separately with 69990.
The following epididymis codes or code ranges are unilateral and
require modifier -50 if the procedure was performed bilaterally:
54700
Incision
54800-54840
Excision
54865
Exploration
The third-party payer may require reporting modifiers -RT and -LT
rather than modifier -50.
Tunica vaginalis
Incision and excision. 
The 
tunica vaginalis
 is a serous sheath of the testis, which can be the
site of a hydrocele (fluid collection). The physician may aspirate the
fluid or inject a substance such as a sclerosing agent (55000) to help
prevent further accumulation of fluid. Another method of
management of a hydrocele is excision (unilateral, 55040 or bilateral,
55041), which may be accompanied by a hernia repair that is reported
separately (49495-49501).
Repair. 
A Bottle type repair (55060) is a surgical procedure performed to
remedy a hydrocele of the tunica vaginalis. An incision is made in the
inguinal or scrotal area, and the hydrocele is drained and
repositioned. A catheter may be left in place to ensure continued
drainage of the area and to prevent further fluid accumulation.
Scrotum
Incision. 
The scrotum is the sac that contains the testes. If a lesion of the skin of
the scrotum is removed, assign codes from the Integumentary System
to report the service. However, if the abscess is in the scrotal wall and
requires drainage, report the procedure with 55100 (Drainage of
scrotal wall abscess). If the abscess is of the epididymis, testis, and/or
scrotal space, report the service with 54700 because the code reports
procedures to any of the three areas.
Repair. 
Scrotoplasty (also known as oscheoplasty) is repair of a congenital
abnormality or traumatic defect of the scrotum. Skin flaps may be
utilized during a simple repair (55175) and in the more complex repair
(55180) rotational pedicle grafts and/or free skin grafts may be used.
Simple skin flaps are included in the scrotoplasty and not reported
separately, but the more complex grafts are reported in addition to the
scrotoplasty.
Vas deferens
Incision. 
The vas deferens is the tube that carries sperm from the testes to the
ejaculatory duct and the urethra. A vasotomy (55200) is cutting into
the vas deferens. Usually the procedure is performed to obtain a
semen sample or to determine if there is obstruction. Code 55200
includes cannulization of the vas deferens. The code describes a
unilateral or bilateral procedure, so there is no need to report modifier
-50 with this code.
Excision. 
A vasectomy (55250) is a procedure in which a section of the vas
deferens is removed for purposes of sterilization. A small incision is
made on the scrotum, and the vas deferens is identified and brought
out through the incision. A section of the vas deferens tube is cut and
tied, stitched or sealed, and the vas deferens is returned to its natural
position. The procedure includes a unilateral or bilateral procedure
and postoperative semen examination(s). The semen is examined at
intervals after sterilization to ensure the procedure was a success.
Introduction. 
A vasotomy (55300) may also be performed for a vasogram, seminal
vesiculogram, or epididymogram in which colored dye is traced
through the vas deferens to visualize any obstruction. The radiological
supervision/interpretation is reported separately with 74440. When a
vasotomy is combined with a testis biopsy, report 54505-51.
Repair. 
A vasovasostomy or vasovasorrhaphy is a procedure to remove
obstruction from the vas deferens or for a vasectomy reversal.
Injection of dye is used during the procedure to identify the area of
blockage. Once the area is identified, it is removed, and the ends of
the vas deferens are anastomosed (reconnected end to end). Semen
sampling may be conducted to ensure the removal of the blockage.
Code 55400 reports a unilateral procedure; modifier -50 should be
added to indicate a bilateral procedure. An operating microscope is
often used during the procedure and is reported separately with
69990.
EXERCISE 20-7
Epididymis, Tunica Vaginalis, and Vas
Deferens
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Epididymis exploration without biopsy due to pain in epididymis
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Aspiration of fluid sac on the testicular covering
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Reversal of previously completed vasectomy, bilateral, using an
operating microscope
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Spermatic cord
Excision and laparoscopy. 
The spermatic cord is a collection of structures that suspends the
testes in the scrotum as illustrated in 
Fig. 20-13
. The spermatic cord
may be the site of formation of a hydrocele, lesion, or varicocele.
Unilateral excision of a spermatic cord hydrocele is reported with
55500 with modifier -50 added to report a bilateral procedure. A
varicocele
 is a mass of enlarged vessels that occurs when the valves
that control blood flow in and out of the vessel become defective, and
the blood is not able to circulate out of the vessel. The trapped blood
causes the vessel to swell. Excision of a varicocele by means of a
scrotal 
approach is reported with 55530, and an abdominal approach
with 55535. A hernia repair may be performed during the same
operative session, and with other procedures in this subsection have
been reported separately. However, the single code 55540 reports both
the varicocele excision and a hernia repair. If the varicocele is repaired
using surgical laparoscopy, report the procedure with 55550.
 
FIGURE 20–13
Spermatic cord.
The following spermatic cord code range is unilateral and requires
modifier -50 if the procedure was performed bilaterally:
55500-55550
Spermatic cord (Excision and Laparoscopy categories)
The third-party payer may require reporting modifiers -RT and -LT
rather than modifier -50.
Seminal vesicles
The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands located posterior to (behind)
the bladder. The glands provide the majority of the fluid that becomes
semen and empties into the ejaculatory ducts and the urethra. Seminal
vesicles codes are located in the 55600-55680 range.
Incision. 
A vesiculotomy is surgical cutting into the seminal vesicles. The
approach can be by an incision into the lower abdomen or the
perineum (between the anus and scrotum). Frequently, the procedure
is performed to relieve pressure due to inflammation. There are two
codes to report a vesiculotomy based on the extent of the dissection
required to accomplish the procedure. If the procedure required
simple
 dissection, report 55600, and if 
complicated
 dissection was
required, report 55605. The codes are unilateral, so a bilateral
procedure requires modifier -50.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-12
1. 
A vesiculotomy may be performed by incision either in the lower
____________________ area or the ____________________ (between
the anus and scrotum).
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Excision. 
A vesiculectomy is the removal of one of the seminal vesicles. The
procedure is performed to remove a tumor, calculus (stone), or other
obstruction. The approach may be through the lower abdomen or
perineum, but the choice of codes is the same (55650) because the code
description indicates “vesiculectomy, any approach.” The code
reports a unilateral procedure, so modifier -50 is required for a
bilateral procedure.
The 
Mullerian ducts
 develop prenatally in females, and the
Wolffian ducts degenerate. In males it is the opposite, the Wolffian
ducts develop, and the Mullerian ducts degenerate. The Mullerian
system develops into oviduct, uterus, and upper vagina. The Wolffian
ducts develop into epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicles. In
some males a remnant of the Mullerian duct remains and a cyst may
form at that site. The cyst may be excised using a lower abdominal or
perineal approach and reported with 55680.
Prostate
The most common conditions involving the prostate are inflammation
(prostatitis), benign enlargement (BPH, benign prostatic hypertrophy),
and cancer. Prostate cancer is the most common type of cancer in men.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatectomy. 
The symptoms of BPH are urinary frequency, nocturia, urgency,
decreased force of urine stream, and the feeling that the bladder has
not completely emptied. These symptoms are a result of the excess
prostate tissue pressing against the urethra and bladder. Treatment
for BPH is based on the degree of prostate enlargement and severity
of symptoms. Minimally invasive treatments include balloon dilation,
prostatic stents, and thermal-based therapies. If these treatments are
not successful, surgical intervention may be necessary, such as
coagulation, transurethral resection, laser vaporization, or open
surgical procedure.
BPH treatment and prostatectomy procedures are reported with
codes from both the Urinary System and/or the Male Genital System.
Prostatic 
stents
 (52282 [permanent], 53855 [temporary]) are flexible
metal mesh tubes designed to be inserted into the urethra at the level
of the prostate and expanded after placement. The stent keeps the
urethra open. Over time, the urothelial tissue grows over the stent and
the stent becomes incorporated into the urethral wall.
Transurethral microwave heat treatment (
TUMT,
 53850) is the use
of microwaves that are sent through a catheter and introduced into
the urethra to coagulate excess prostate tissue and allow the urethra to
be less constricted.
Transurethral needle ablation (
TUNA,
 53852) is a procedure that
utilizes radiofrequency to create heat that is applied to the prostate to
destroy excess prostate tissue. During this procedure the urethra is
punctured to allow the needles to be placed directly into the prostate.
The needles are insulated, so the urethra is not damaged when
pierced.
For some patients these less radical treatments are not effective or
advisable. For example, for patients with renal insufficiency, recurrent
gross hematuria, or bladder stones because of BPH, a surgical
procedure is the recommended treatment option. Surgical therapies
include transurethral prostate incision, electrovaporization, and laser
ablation/coagulation. Let’s take a closer look at each of these surgical
options:
Transurethral resection
 of the prostate (
TURP,
 52601, 52630) is the
gold-standard of surgical procedures for removal of tumor or
prostatic tissue. A special type of cystoscope is inserted through the
urethra. The scope has lights, valves for controlling irrigation fluids,
and an electrical loop to remove tissue and/or obstructions and
cauterize blood vessels.
Transurethral incision of the prostate (
TUIP,
 52450) is used when
the prostate is only slightly enlarged. Two incisions are made in the
prostate to relieve the pressure on the urethra without removing
tissue.
When a laser is used to accomplish the prostatectomy, the choice of
codes is first based on whether the procedure was a coagulation
(52647) or vaporization (52648). Code 52648 includes with or without
transurethral resection of the prostate.
Laser coagulation (52647)
■
 
Transurethral ultrasound-guided laser induced prostatectomy
(
TULIP,
 non-contact) is a procedure in which a laser is used to
coagulate prostate tissue. There is no direct visualization of the
prostate using this method, and the penetration is not as deep as
with other more commonly performed methods.
■
 
Visual laser of the prostate (
VLAP,
 non-contact) is under the direct
vision of the surgeon, but the laser fiber does not come in direct
contact with the prostate. This method coagulates the tissue rather
than vaporizing it. Once coagulated, the tissue dies and is sloughed
off, which relieves the pressure.
■
 
Interstitial laser coagulation of prostate (
ILCP,
 contact) uses several
laser fibers that are placed directly into the prostate to coagulate the
tissue. There is no direct visualization with the ILCP.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-13
1. 
Code 52647, laser coagulation of the prostate, may be accomplished
by one of three techniques: TULIP (non-contact, no direct
visualization), ____________ (non-contact, direct visualization), or
____________ (contact, no direct visualization).
 
(Answers are located
in
 
Appendix C
)
Laser vaporization (52648)
■
 
Transurethral vaporization of the prostate (
TUVP
 or 
TVP,
 contact)
uses electrical current to vaporize tissue of the prostate by means of
a ball that is rolled over the tissue. The ball contains a current that
vaporizes the tissue. This procedure is a modification of a TURP.
Laser vaporization with/without resection (52648)
■
 
Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (
HoLEP,
 contact), also
known as transurethral holmium laser resection 
(THLR),
 is a
procedure used to resect prostate tissue by means of a holmium
laser fiber. There is less intraoperative bleeding with this procedure
than with a TURP.
There are many different techniques used to remove the prostate
(prostatectomy). Codes in the Excision category (55801-55865)
represent open surgical procedures. Determination of the correct code
to report a prostatectomy (removal of the prostate) is based first on
the 
approach
 (perineal, suprapubic, or retropubic).
■
 
Perineal approach is through the space between the rectum and the
base of the scrotum and is used to gain access to a prostate that is
located closer to the perineal area.
■
 
Suprapubic approach is through the lower abdominal region, and it
is used to gain access to the front (anterior) surface of the bladder.
The access to the prostate is gained by an opening in the bladder
neck.
■
 
Retropubic approach is also through the lower abdominal region
and is used to gain access to the front (anterior) of the prostate.
Once the correct approach has been identified, the 
extent
 of the
procedure will determine code selection. The term “subtotal” used in
many of the code descriptions means anything less than the total
removal of the prostate, and the term “radical” means total removal of
the prostate.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-14
There are different approaches to an open prostatectomy. Match the
approach with the definition.
1. 
Perineal _____
2. 
Suprapubic _____
3. 
Retropubic _____
a. 
Through the lower abdominal region to gain access to the anterior
prostate
b. 
Through the space between the rectum and the base of the scrotum
c. 
Through the lower abdominal region to gain access to the anterior
surface of the bladder, opening the bladder neck to access the
prostate
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Codes 55812-55815 and 55842-55845 include code selection based on
the lymph node biopsy/removal performed. If lymph node biopsy
(single or multiple) and limited removal of pelvic lymph node(s) was
performed, report 55812 (perineal approach) or 55842 (retropubic
approach). If lymph nodes were removed bilaterally and include the
external iliac, hypogastric and obturator nodes, report 55815 (perineal
approach) or 55845 (retropubic approach).
A laparoscopic retropubic prostatectomy (
LRP,
 55866) is a
minimally invasive procedure that may be utilized instead of an open
procedure. Robotic assisted prostatectomy 
(RAP)
 is a new
instrumentation used with LRP and is designed to assist in the
performance of some surgical tasks. Several small incisions are made
through which robotic instrumentation is inserted. The surgeon
operates the instrumentation from a console. The use of RAP
necessitates an assistant during surgery. Surgeons who use a RAP
system are extensively trained by the manufacturer of the system
before using the system during surgery. The new robotic systems
enhance the precision with which the procedure can be performed.
 One such robotic system is
the da Vinci® prostatectomy system and a video about the procedure
can be viewed at 
www.davinciprostatectomy.com/da-vinci-
prostatectomy/
.
Now that you have reviewed BPH treatment and prostatectomies,
let’s review the remaining codes in the Prostate category.
Biopsy. 
Biopsy of the prostate may be performed with a needle, punch, or by
incision. Report a prostate biopsy with 55700 (needle, punch), 55705
(incisional), or 55706 (transperineal, stereotactic). Do not report these
codes during the same procedure. For example, if, during the same
operative session, a needle or punch biopsy of the prostate (55700) is
undertaken, and it is followed by an incisional biopsy (55705) either to
supplement or to obtain adequate tissue, the appropriate CPT code to
report is 55705, not both codes. Do not confuse a prostate biopsy with
a fine needle aspiration (FNA). During an FNA, fluid is withdrawn for
analysis and is reported with 10021 or 10022.
 
QUICK CHECK 20-15
1. 
Biopsy of the prostate may be accomplished by one of three
methods: incision, ___________, or ___________.
 
(Answers are located
in
 
Appendix C
)
A 
prostatotomy
 is an incision into the prostate. Codes 55720
(simple) and 55725 (complicated) describe prostatotomies performed
to drain an abscess. The surgeon inserts a needle into the prostate via
the perineum or through the rectum. Reporting of the procedure is
based on if the procedure was simple or complicated. A complicated
prostatotomy would document excess bleeding or other factors that
increase time and effort necessary to complete the service.
Brachytherapy. 
Brachytherapy (55860-55865) is a type of radiation treatment for
prostate cancer and utilizes high dose rate (HDR, temporary method)
or low dose (permanent seeds) and may be used in combination with
biopsy/removal of lymph nodes (
Fig. 20-14
). The placement of the
brachytherapy element(s) can be accomplished by transperineal
placement (through the area between scrotum and anus) or with open
exposure of the prostate. The transperineal placement involves the
fastening of a template to the perineal area. The template contains a
pattern of holes that indicate where the catheters or needles are to be
placed to correctly access the area around the prostate. Approximately
100 permanent seeds are placed for the low-dose method.
 
FIGURE 20–14
Brachytherapy for prostate cancer.
For the high-dose method of temporary delivery, small catheters are
placed into the prostate, and a series of radiation treatments are
delivered. For example, a patient would present to an outpatient
department of the hospital where a template would be fastened to the
perineal area. The catheters would be inserted through the holes in the
template into the prostate. The treatment plan is established by the
radiation oncologist, and the computer that is attached to the catheters
is set to deliver the prescribed dose of radiation. If the prescribed dose
cannot be administered in one session, the catheters remain in place,
and the patient remains in the hospital overnight. The next day, the
patient would receive another radiation treatment. The catheters
would be removed, and the patient would be discharged from the
hospital. An advantage of the HDR is that the physician can regulate
the radiation dosage more precisely than with the low-dose method.
The transperineal placement is reported by the surgeon or urologist
with 55875 and includes the use of a cystoscope if applicable. The
placement of the radioelements is reported separately by the radiation
oncologist with 77778, 77799. If ultrasound guidance is used during
the placement, the guidance is reported separately with 76965,
ultrasonic guidance for interstitial radioelement application.
Another approach for placement of radioactive substances is the
open approach in which the prostate is viewed by the surgeon. The
exposure procedure is reported by the surgeon or urologist with
55860, and the application of the radioelements is reported by the
radiation oncologist with 77778, 77799, based on the number of
sources placed: simple (1-4), intermediate (5-10), complex (>10).
During the same operative session in which the radioelements are
placed, the surgeon may biopsy lymph nodes and/or may perform a
lymphadenectomy 
(55862). If a bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy is
performed and includes the external iliac, hypogastric, and obturator
nodes, the procedure is reported with 55865.
Transrectal ultrasound (
TRU,
 76872) is guidance that is often used
when reporting biopsy, evaluation and staging for prostate cancer,
delivery of brachytherapy, evaluation or aspiration of prostate
abscess, evaluation of infertility, diagnosis of prostate abnormalities,
and monitoring of treatment response.
EXERCISE 20-8
Spermatic Cord and Prostate
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A 75-year-old male patient presents with a PSA of 8.1. He has a 100-
gram prostate, and 1 out of 10 cores were positive for
adenocarcinoma. The patient was placed in the supine position and
a number 20 French Foley catheter was inserted into the bladder. A
lower abdominal midline incision was made and the retropubic
space was entered. Bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy was
performed in the usual manner and included the external iliac,
obturator, and hypogastric nodes. Lymph nodes were small and
were sent for permanent section to pathology. The prostate was
extremely large. The prostate was mobilized using blunt dissection
technique. The area was closed in the usual manner. Pathology
report later indicated primary malignant neoplasm of the prostate.
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
The 68-year-old male patient presents with BPH. Two 18-gauge
needles were affixed to the catheter, and by means of a rigid
cystoscope, the needles were transurethrally inserted into the
prostate. Radiofrequency waves were set at 490 kHz and 99ºC was
obtained. Ablation of the area was completed and the cystoscope
withdrawn.
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 20 learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What is the term that describes exploration of the inside of the
kidney? _________________________________________
2 What organs are found in the subheadings located in the Urinary
System subsection? ______________________________
3 What is the definition of the medical term “ablation”?
_______________________________________________________
4 The male genital system is divided into what subheadings?
___________________________________________________
5 Lesion destruction codes found in the subheading Penis are divided
based on whether the destruction is
_______________________________________________ or
_______________________________________________.
6 What is the definition of the medical term “orchiectomy”?
___________________________________________________
Chapter 20, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, complete the following:
1 The greatest number of category codes in the Male Genital System
fall under the ___________________ subheading because of the
numerous repairs made to this anatomic area.
2 In what section of the CPT manual would you find a code for a
superficial abscess of the skin of the penis? _____________ System
3 What is the term that pertains to the motion and flow of urine?
___________________
4 What is the modifier that indicates that only the professional portion
of the service was performed? 
(Make sure to include a dash in front of
your modifier answer. -XX)
 ____________
5 The Urinary System subsection is arranged ___________________ by
the subheadings.
6 The ____________________ area is located behind the abdominal
cavity and during surgical procedures is often accessed by an
abdominal incision.
7 A(n) __________________ is a procedure that is used to decompress
the renal system by means of inserting a catheter into the kidney
while leaving the other end of the catheter outside the body to
temporarily drain the kidney.
8 A(n) ___________________ calculus involves at least two calyces and
the renal pelvis and accounts for about 30% of the stones reported.
9 You report the removal of an accessible stent of kidney when
imaging guidance is not indicated using a(n) ___________________
code.
a surgical
b urinary
c E/M
d respiratory
10 If an obstruction occurs, the urine will not drain and may result in
dilatation of the collecting system and enlargement of the renal pelvis,
also known as ___________________.
11 A transvesical ureterolithotomy is one that is performed through
the bladder for the removal of ___________________.
12 A urethroplasty may be one stage or two stages, and the choice of
codes is based on the number of stages, type of repair, and for some
codes the ___________________ of the patient.
Chapter 20, part II, practical
Code the following cases with CPT and ICD-10-CM codes (Separate multiple
codes with a comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX, XXXXX.
Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers. XXXXX-XX.
Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x X):
13 Incision and drainage of deep penis abscess
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
14 Extensive destruction of penile herpetic vesicle lesions using
cryosurgery
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
15 Biopsy of kidney with percutaneous incision by trocar for a patient
with a diagnosis of microalbuminuria
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
16 Physician providing the technical and professional component of a
cystography with contrast and four views for a patient with hematuria
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
17 A one-stage distal hypospadias repair with circumcision and a V-
flap for meatal advancement
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
18 Needle biopsy with ultrasound guidance of the prostate of an 87-
year-old male with an elevated PSA. The pathology results of the
biopsy are negative for malignancy.
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
19 Dilation with urethral dilator of a urethral stricture of male due to
syphilis
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
20 Injection procedure for Peyronie’s disease
CPT Code: ___________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 21
Reproductive, intersex surgery,
female genital system, and
maternity care and delivery
 
“My motto for my billing and coding students is, ‘Persist until you
succeed.’ ”
Patricia Sommerfeld, CPC
Senior Client Manager
 
HealthMed Inc.
 
Adjunct Instructor
 
Mercy College of Health Sciences
 
Des Moines, Iowa
CHAPTER TOPICS
Reproductive System Procedures
Intersex Surgery
Female Genital System
Maternity Care and Delivery
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Describe reproductive services.
2 
Report reproductive services.
3 
Report intersex surgery services.
4 
Understand the format of the Female Genital System subsection.
5 
Identify elements of component coding with Female Genital System
codes.
6 
Define the critical terms in maternity and delivery services.
7 
Define services in the global maternity and delivery package.
8 
Understand the format of the Maternity Care and Delivery
subsection services.
9 
Demonstrate the ability to code the Female Genital and Maternity
Care and Delivery subsection.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Reproductive system procedures
The Reproductive System Procedures subsection (55920) is located
after the Male Genital System subsection and consists of only one
code. Code 55920 reports the placement of needles or catheters into
the pelvic organs and/or genitalia (except prostate) for the subsequent
interstitial radioelement application (brachytherapy). This procedure
is performed with the patient anesthetized. The surgeon examines the
diseased areas to determine the area(s) that require treatment. A
template device is inserted into the vagina and positioned over the
areas to receive the radioelement insertions. The number and depth of
the needles or catheters varies depending on the area to be treated, but
typically 32 flexiguide catheters are inserted.
This code is not used to report radioelement application for the
prostate, which is reported with 55875. Insertion of a vaginal ovoid
brachytherapy system is a common type used to treat cervical cancer
and is reported with 57155. A Heyman capsule indicated in the
parenthetical statement following 55920 directs the coder to 58346
when reporting Heyman capsule insertion. A Heyman capsule was a
method of manual loading that was used in the early days of
brachytherapy. The physician would manually insert the capsule into
the treatment area, which necessitated the physician being in contact
with the radioactive source. The newer methods of brachytherapy are
safer as the radioelements are inserted via catheters, thus reducing the
exposure of health care providers.
Intersex surgery
The Intersex Surgery subsection (55970, 55980) is located before the
Female Genital Surgery subsection and contains only two codes: one
for a surgical procedure to change the sex organs of a male into those
of a female and one to change the sex organs of a female into those of
a male. These specialized procedures include a series of procedures
that take place over an extended period of time. The procedures are
performed by physicians who have special skills and training.
The procedure for changing male genitalia into female genitalia
involves removing the penis but preserving the nerves and vessels
intact. These tissues are used to form a clitoris and a vagina. The
urethral opening is shifted to be in the position of that of a female.
The surgical procedure for changing the female genitalia into male
genitalia involves a series of procedures that use the genitalia and
surrounding skin to form a penis and testicle structures into which
prostheses are inserted.
 
QUICK CHECK 21-1
1. 
How many codes are there in the Intersex Surgery subsection?
___________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Female genital system
Format
The Female Genital System subsection (56405-58999) is divided
according to anatomic site, from the vulva up to the ovaries (
Fig. 21-1
).
The anatomic sites are then divided on the basis of category of
procedure (i.e., incision, excision, destruction). Codes for in vitro
fertilization are located at the end of the subsection.
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 21–1
A,
 Female genital system. 
B,
 Anterior view, female
genital system. 
C,
 External female genital system. 
D,
 Parts of vulva.
The subsection has a wide variety of codes for minor procedures
that are performed in a physician’s office as well as for major
procedures that are performed in a hospital setting. It 
is important to
read the descriptions of the codes as well as the notes to avoid
unbundling in this subsection. For example, if a total abdominal
hysterectomy was performed as well as a bilateral oophorectomy
(removal of ovaries), only 58150 would be reported because the code
description includes the statement “with or without removal of
ovary(s).” Bundled into the code are both the abdominal hysterectomy
and a bilateral oophorectomy.
There are many screening (well woman) services provided, such as
screening mammography, Pap tests, and pelvic examination, in
addition to colorectal cancer screening and bone mass measurements.
In this text, these services are reviewed in the chapter that refers to the
codes that would be submitted for the services. For example,
mammography is in 
Chapter 24
, Radiology.
Vulva, perineum, and introitus
There is a repeated note in the Vulva, Perineum, and Introitus
subheading (56405-56821) indicating procedures performed on the
Skene’s glands are not reported using codes in the Female Genital
System subsection but instead are coded using Surgery section,
Urinary System subsection codes. That is because Skene’s glands, also
known as 
para-urethral ducts,
 are a group of small mucous glands
located near the lower end of the urethra and are part of the urinary
system. Procedures involving Skene’s glands are, therefore, reported
using Urinary System codes (53060 or 53270).
Incision. 
The vulva includes the following parts: mons pubis, labia majora,
labia minora, bulb of vestibule, vaginal orifice or vestibule of the
vagina, and the greater (Bartholin’s gland) and lesser vestibule glands
(see 
Fig. 21-1
, 
C
 and 
D
). When the code description indicates the
incision and drainage of an abscess of the vulva, the code reports an
abscess of any of those anatomic areas. For example, if a medical
record indicates “an incision and drainage of an abscess of Bartholin’s
gland,” you must know that Bartholin’s gland is considered a part of
the vulva, so the code will be located in that subheading.
Destruction. 
Destruction of lesions of the vulva, perineum, or introitus can be
accomplished using a variety of methods—laser surgery, cryosurgery,
electrosurgery, or chemical destruction. Destruction codes are divided
on the basis of whether the destruction is simple or extensive,
although the code description does not define simple or extensive.
Complexity is based on the physician’s judgment of complexity, and
the complexity will be stated in the medical record.
 
CAUTION 
Destruction is not excision. Destruction is obliteration or eradication.
Excision is removal. With destruction no tissue is removed, as the tissue is
destroyed. There is no pathology report after a lesion has been destroyed
because there is nothing for the pathologist to analyze.
Excision. 
The first two codes (56605 and 56606) in the Excision category are for
biopsies in which the physician takes a tissue sample by removing a
piece of tissue with a scalpel or punch. The area to be biopsied is
anesthetized with local anesthetic before the biopsy is performed. The
physician may suture the area or use clips for closure. The local
anesthesia and closure are included in the package of an excision
code, so be careful not to unbundle and report these separately. The
codes are also divided on the number of lesions, one and each
additional lesion. When using the additional lesions code, be certain
to specify the number of lesions biopsied by listing the number of
units on the CMS-1500 form in Block 24-G.
 
CODING SHOT
If the excision is of a lesion of the skin of the genitalia, report the
service with 11420-11426 (Excision of benign lesion) or 11620-11626
(Excision of malignant lesion).
Vulvectomy
 is the surgical removal of a portion of the vulva.
Usually a vulvectomy is performed to treat a malignant or
premalignant lesion. The following definitions apply to the
vulvectomy codes (56620-56640) and describe the extent and size of
the vulvar area removed during the procedure.
Extent
Simple
skin and superficial subcutaneous tissue
Radical
skin and deep subcutaneous tissue
Size
Partial
less than 80%
Complete
greater than 80%
The vulvectomy codes are divided on the basis of these definitions
of extent and size. The extent and size are stated in combination. For
example, simple partial vulvectomy describes 
a superficial
subcutaneous tissue 
(extent)
 removal of 78% 
(size)
 of the vulvar area.
Bundled into the codes is usual closure, but if plastic repair is
required, you would report the repair in addition to the procedure.
The operative report will indicate the extent of the procedure and the
closure.
 
CODING SHOT
There are two labia: labia minora and labia majora (
Fig. 21-2
). A
partial vulvectomy (less than 80%) pertains to leaving at least 20% of
the vulvar area.
 
FIGURE 21–2
Labia majora and labia minora.
The more radical procedures involving the vulva are usually
performed because of a demonstrated malignancy, and more
extensive removal takes place. This radical removal can include the
removal of deep lymph nodes, saphenous veins, ligaments, or large
amounts of tissue from the lower abdomen or even from the thigh.
The procedure may also be performed bilaterally, so don’t forget to
add modifier -50 when reporting a bilateral procedure.
 
CODING SHOT
Most payers do not make a reimbursement adjustment for bilateral
procedures of the vulva. For example, Medicare does not make an
adjustment. You must review each payer’s guidelines to determine
how to submit this code.
Repair. 
The procedure codes in the Repair category (56800-56810) describe
plastic repair of the vulva, perineum, or introitus. Plastic repair of the
introitus
 is surgical repair of the opening of the vagina. The extent
and nature of the procedure are determined by the defect being
repaired and varies greatly from patient to patient.
Clitoroplasty
 is surgical reduction of a clitoris (
Fig. 21-3
) that has
become enlarged due to an adrenal gland imbalance.
 
FIGURE 21–3
Reduction clitoroplasty.
Perineoplasty
 is plastic repair of the perineum, usually to provide
additional support to the perineal area.
Vagina
The Vagina subheading includes the code range 57000-57426.
Colpotomy
 (57000-57010) is cutting into the vagina to gain access to
the pelvic cavity. The procedure is performed to explore the pelvic
cavity or to drain a pelvic abscess. 
Colpocentesis
 (57020) is the
insertion of a long needle (puncture) attached to a syringe through the
back wall of the vagina to gain access to the peritoneal cul-de-sac—the
area between the uterus and the rectum—to drain fluid. If the
colpocentesis is a part of a more major procedure, you do not report it
separately, as it is considered to be bundled into the more major
procedure. Note that 57020 has “(separate procedure)” after it to
designate colpocentesis as a minor procedure that is reported only if it
is the only procedure performed of the area.
Destruction. 
As with the destruction codes for the vulva, the destruction codes
(57061, 57065) for the Vagina subsection are divided on the basis of
whether the destruction was simple or extensive, in the judgment of
the physician. Any method of destruction is acceptable for assignment
of these codes.
Excision. 
The Excision category of the Vagina subsection contains codes (57100-
57135) for reporting the services of biopsy, vaginectomy (removal of
part or all of the vagina), colpocleisis (closure of the vaginal canal),
and cyst/lesion removal. The vaginectomy codes are divided
according to the extent of the procedure—
partial
 or 
total
—and the
extent to which tissue and adjacent structure(s) are removed.
 
From the Trenches
“Be willing to learn everything there is to know. Medical
terminology and anatomy/physiology are a must for the successful
coder.”
PATRICIA
Introduction. 
The Introduction category (57150-57180) contains codes for vaginal
irrigation. Also included is the insertion of a tandem and/or vaginal
ovoids for brachytherapy. The tandems and/or vaginal ovoids are
internal implants that contain a radioactive substance and are often
used in the treatment of cervical cancer, as illustrated in 
Fig. 21-4
. A
tandem is a small, hollow metal tube that is inserted through the
vagina into the uterus (intrauterine tandem). Vaginal ovoids are small
metal cylinders that are placed into the vagina and 
positioned against
the cervix (intravaginal ovoid). The implants then deliver a
concentrated dose of radiation to the site of the tumor.
 
FIGURE 21–4
Tandem and ovoid.
Other codes in the Introduction category report the insertion of a
support device (pessary, 
Fig. 21-5
), diaphragm, or cervical cap (to
prevent pregnancy); and packing of the vagina (for vaginal
hemorrhage). Pessaries are used for vaginal prolapse. The pessary and
diaphragm/cervical cap are not included in these Introduction codes.
The supply of these devices would be reported using code 99070,
supplies, or a HCPCS code (e.g., A4561).
 
FIGURE 21–5
Vaginal pessary (Arabin type).
Repair. 
The Repair category (57200-57335) is rather extensive, as the possible
forms of repair of the vagina are many. A note in parentheses,
“(nonobstetrical),” sometimes follows the code description in the
Female Genital System subsection because if the procedure was
performed as a part of an obstetric procedure, you would use a code
from the Maternity Care and Delivery subsection.
A surgeon performs a 
colporrhaphy
 to strengthen an area on the
wall of the vagina that is weak by pulling together the weakened
vaginal area with sutures. Excess tissue can also be removed to tighten
the area. The reinforcement might be performed for several reasons,
but it is commonly done to prevent the bladder from protruding into
the weakened vaginal wall (cystocele) or the rectum from protruding
into the vagina (rectocele).
In this Repair category, the codes are often divided on the basis of
the approach used. For example, an abdominal approach (open,
57270) to the repair of an enterocele (herniation of intestines through
intact vaginal mucosa) has a different code than a vaginal approach
(57268) to the same repair; and an anterior colporrhaphy (vaginal
repair) (57240) differs from a posterior colporrhaphy (57250). Pay
particular attention to the 
approach
 used. You will find the approach
documented in the operative report.
One method of vaginal repair that is not in the Repair category is
the laparoscopic repair. Codes for repair of the vagina using a
colposcope (microscope) are located in the Vagina subheading,
Endoscopy category. The colposcope enables the physician to directly
view changes in the vagina and cervix.
 
CAUTION 
Coders need to pay close attention to the
 
method
 
as well as to the
approach.
 
For example, a surgeon might perform an open procedure as
opposed to a laparoscopic procedure.
Notes throughout the Repair category will frequently direct you to
the correct code or code range in the Urinary System subsection.
Often, the only difference between surgical procedures reported with
Female Genital System codes and those reported with the Urinary
System codes is the 
approach
. For example, Female Genital System
code 57330 describes the closure of a vesicovaginal fistula (abnormal
channel between bladder and vagina) using a vaginal approach,
whereas Urinary System code 51900 describes the same procedure
using an abdominal approach. The approach would be documented in
the operative report.
Manipulation. 
Manipulation
 of the vagina includes dilation (stretching), pelvic
examination, and removal of foreign material. What these three
different procedures have in common is that they are all performed
under 
general anesthesia
 because a patient cannot tolerate the
procedure while awake. If a local anesthetic or no anesthetic was used,
which is the usual case, you would not use a Manipulation code
(57400-57415); instead, the service would be included in the
Evaluation and Management (E/M) service. For example, if a
physician removed an impacted tampon from the vagina and used no
anesthetic during the procedure, only the office visit at which the
removal took place would be reported.
Endoscopy. 
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the endoscopic procedure codes
(57420-57426) in the Endoscopy category of the Vagina subheading are
for colposcopic procedures. The colposcopic procedures are often
bundled into other, more major procedures. 
Fig. 21-6
 illustrates an
endocervical polyp protruding through the external os (mouth of the
cervix) as seen by the physician using a colposcope. Only when a
colposcopic procedure is performed as the only procedure or is
unrelated to another procedure(s) being performed is the colposcopy
reported.
 
FIGURE 21–6
Endocervical polyp protruding through the mouth of the
cervix as seen through a colposcope.
If a biopsy of the vagina or cervix is performed with colposcopy, the
code to report the service is 57421. The code specifies “biopsy(s),” so
whether one or multiple biopsies were taken, 57421 represents the
total service.
Cervix uteri
The Cervix Uteri subheading contains codes (57452-57800) for
endoscopy, excision, repair, and manipulation.
Endoscopy. 
Similar to the vaginal endoscopic codes, the colposcopy codes report
procedures of the cervix uteri (57452-57461). A loop electrode excision
procedure is referred to as LEEP, LETZ, or cervical loop diathermy
and is an office procedure that uses heated wire (
Fig. 21-7
) to remove
cervical tissue. The device is attached to an electric generator that
heats the wire. The procedure has a lower risk level and is less
expensive than other methods. A LEEP would usually be performed
after an abnormal Pap smear result or an abnormal examination. The
cervix is moistened, and the loop is positioned over the cervix and
drawn across the area. The resulting slice is examined by a
pathologist. The device is also used to cauterize the area at the end of
the procedure by means of a different attachment.
 
FIGURE 21–7
The loop used in the electrosurgical excision
procedure.
Excision. 
The codes in the Excision category often specify “(separate
procedure)” because many times the procedures are bundled into a
more major procedure. For example, the excision procedure of a
biopsy is often incidental to a more major surgical procedure, such as
a hysterectomy, and the biopsy would not be reported separately.
Codes for 
conization
 of the cervix are divided on the basis of the
method used to obtain the tissue (
Fig. 21-8
). In conization, a cone of
tissue is removed from the cervix for a biopsy or treatment of a lesion
by means of excision of the lesion. Although a laser is a frequently
used method of conization, LEEP technology is also widely used. The
code for a LEEP procedure with 
cervical biopsy
 in the Cervix Uteri
subheading, Endoscopy category, is 57460, and the code for a LEEP
procedure with 
cervical conization
 is 57461. The difference between
the codes is that the cervical biopsy procedure only removes a sample
with return in the future if the lesion is to be completely removed. The
conization procedure removes a cone-shaped tissue of the cervix after
application of iodine to highlight the abnormal tissue. Also, the
cervical biopsy is performed with the use of a colposcope
(endoscopy), and the conization is performed using a speculum (
Fig.
21-9
) (an instrument inserted into a cavity to stretch the opening). Be
certain, when coding cervical biopsy and conization, that the
information in the medical record provides sufficient detail to allow
you to distinguish between a biopsy and a conization. If the record is
not complete enough to make the determination, obtain the
information from the physician before assigning a code.
 
FIGURE 21–8
Conization.
 
FIGURE 21–9
Graves specula.
Repair. 
Nonobstetric 
cerclage
 (repair of the cervix) involves extensive
suturing of the cervix to decrease the size of the opening into the
vagina (reported with 57700). 
Trachelorrhaphy
 (57720) is a complex
cervical repair in which plastic methods are used to repair a laceration
of the cervix. Both Repair codes use a vaginal approach
.
Manipulation. 
Dilation of the cervix is coded separately only if it is the only
procedure performed (57800). Dilation of the cervix, like dilation of
the vagina, is usually bundled into a more major procedure.
Corpus uteri
The corpus uteri (58100-58579) is the anatomic area above the isthmus
and below the opening for the fallopian tubes. The subheading
contains the categories of excision, introduction, repair, and
laparoscopy/hysteroscopy procedures. Many of the procedures in the
category are very complex, and some of them have several variations.
Let’s review some of the highlights of corpus uteri coding.
Excision. 
Endometrial 
sampling
 is a biopsy of the mucous lining of the uterus.
The physician inserts a curet (spoon-shaped instrument) into the
endocervical canal to extract tissue samples for pathologic
examination. If the sampling is the only procedure performed, it is
reported (58100, 58110), but if it is performed as part of a more major
procedure involving the cervix, it is considered incidental to the more
major procedure and is bundled into the surgical package.
Dilation and curettage
 (D&C; 58120) can be a diagnostic or
therapeutic procedure performed when an endometrial biopsy has
failed or was inconclusive or to determine the cause of abnormal
bleeding or locate a neoplasm. Clamps are used to manipulate the
cervix, a curet is inserted into the uterus, and fragments are removed
from the endometrium. The tissue is sent to pathology for analysis.
D&C in the Corpus Uteri subheading is for nonobstetric patients only.
If a D&C is performed because of postpartum hemorrhage, a code
from the subsection Maternity Care and Delivery would be assigned
to report the service (59160).
 
CODING SHOT
Many third-party payers will not reimburse for a dilation and
curettage if it is performed with any other pelvic surgery because it is
thought to be integral to or a part of the procedure. The CPT manual
does not list a D&C as a “(separate procedure)”; therefore, you need
to be familiar with the specific reimbursement policies of the payer.
Hysterectomy codes (58150-58294) represent the majority of the
codes in the Corpus Uteri subheading. A 
hysterectomy
 is the removal
of the uterus, but in the CPT manual there are many variations of this
procedure. The division of the hysterectomy codes is based first on the
approach
 (abdominal or vaginal), then on the secondary procedures
(extent)
 that were performed (removal of tubes, biopsy, bladder, etc.).
You have to read the code descriptions carefully to determine what is
bundled into each code. Because so many procedures are bundled into
some of the codes, you also have to be careful not to unbundle and
code for items already covered in the main procedure. For example, a
total abdominal hysterectomy can include the removal of the ovaries
and/or the fallopian tubes; therefore, billing separately for the removal
of the ovaries or tubes would be unbundling.
Within the Excision category there are codes for abdominal
approaches for hysterectomies. An 
abdominal approach
 is one in
which the surgeon opens the abdomen to view by means of an
incision. Review the codes in the range 58150-58240 and underline
“abdominal” in each of the codes as a reminder of the approach used
in these codes. The other type of surgical approach for hysterectomies
listed in the Excision category is the vaginal approach. Using the
vaginal approach,
 the surgeon makes an incision in the vagina around
the cervix and removes the uterus and/or ovaries/fallopian tubes
(salpingo-oophorectomy) through the incision. The cuff of the vagina
is then closed with sutures. Review the codes in the range 58260-58294
and underline “vaginal” as a reminder of the approach used in these
codes.
 
QUICK CHECK 21-2
1. 
What is the difference between codes 58260 and 58290?
___________________________
2. 
Locate the myomectomy codes 58140, 58145, 58545, and 58546 in the
CPT manual. Review the codes and identify the determining factors
when selecting a code.
a. 
approach, location, number
b. 
approach, number, weight
c. 
location, weight, pathological outcome
d. 
weight, number, age of patient
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Introduction. 
It is in the Introduction category (58300-58356) that you will locate the
codes for some very common procedures such as the insertion and
removal of an 
intrauterine device
 (IUD), as illustrated in 
Fig. 21-10
,
for birth control and for some not-so-common procedures such as
artificial insemination. There are also several codes that have
radiology components—your component coding skills will again be
used.
 
FIGURE 21–10
Intrauterine device (IUD).
Because intrauterine device (IUD) insertion is reported using
Introduction category code 58300, you might think IUD removal
would be in a removal category, but it is in the Introduction category
(58301).
 
CODING SHOT
The cost of the IUD is not included in the code for the insertion of the
IUD. You report the cost of the device separately, using 99070 or a
HCPCS code (J7300 or S4989).
Don’t confuse the insertion of an IUD with the placement of an
implantable contraceptive such as Norplant, as described in the
Integumentary subsection.
The specialized fertility procedure of 
artificial insemination
 (58321-
58323) and the preparation of the sperm for insemination are reported
with Introduction category codes. During the insemination procedure,
sperm is injected into the cervix and often a cervical cap is inserted to
keep the sperm in the cervical area. 
In vitro fertilization
 is a different
procedure in which an egg from the female is withdrawn and
fertilized with sperm in a laboratory for 2 to 3 days with subsequent
implantation into the uterus. There is an In Vitro Fertilization
subheading containing codes 58970-58976 to report these services,
located at the end of the Female Genital System subsection.
Catheterization and introduction (58340) of saline or contrast
material through the cervix and uterus and into the fallopian tubes
(hysterosalpingography) is performed by a physician to identify
blockage or abnormalities of the fallopian tubes. Ultrasound can also
be used for the same procedure (hysterosonography). You need to
remember your component coding and report the radiology or
ultrasound portion of the procedure with a code from the Radiology
section. A note following 58340 in the CPT manual directs you to the
correct component code. For the radiographic supervision and
interpretation, the component code is 74740; for the ultrasound
(sonohysterography), the code is 76831.
A 
hysterosalpingography
 is a diagnostic procedure to test the
patency (unblocked) of the fallopian tubes. Saline or contrast material
is injected into a tube (58340). A catheter may be introduced (58345)
and passed through the fallopian tube using x-ray to show where the
catheter encounters an obstruction or a narrowing of the tube. A code
from the Radiology section, Gynecological and Obstetrical subsection,
would report the radiology portion of the service (74742).
Chromotubation
 (58350) is a surgical procedure to open an obstructed
or narrowed tube.
Laparoscopy/hysteroscopy. 
An increasing number of procedures are being performed by using an
endoscope instead of opening the area to complete view. With an
endoscopic procedure, usually two or three small incisions are made
through which lights, cameras, and instruments may be passed. The
surgeon first inserts an instrument into the vagina to grasp the cervix.
The laparoscope is then inserted into the abdomen and the uterus
and/or ovaries/fallopian tubes are excised. An incision is made in the
vagina and the surgically excised material is removed through the
vaginal incision. The vagina is then repaired by means of sutures.
Review the codes in the range 58541-58579 and underline
“Laparoscopy” or “Hysteroscopy” as a reminder of the approach used
in these codes. It is very important to read the full code description to
identify the approach. Because endoscopic procedures are less
invasive, patients are more accepting of the procedures, and recovery
times and risks are reduced. 
Fig. 21-11
 illustrates a laparoscopy
procedure and 
Fig. 21-12
 illustrates a laparoscopy/hysteroscopy
procedure.
 
FIGURE 21–11
Laparoscopy.
 
FIGURE 21–12
Hysteroscopy/laparoscopy.
The first rule of a laparoscopy or hysteroscopy is that all surgical
procedures include a 
diagnostic
 procedure. You never unbundle a
surgical laparoscopic procedure by also reporting a diagnostic
procedure. If a procedure started out as a diagnostic laparoscopic
procedure and ended up being a surgical laparoscopic procedure, you
report only for the surgical laparoscopy.
 
CAUTION 
If the laparoscopy is of the peritoneum, you assign a code (49320) from the
laparoscopy category of the Digestive System, Abdomen, Peritoneum, and
Omentum subheading.
The codes in the Laparoscopy/Hysteroscopy category are divided
on the basis of approach—laparoscopy or hysteroscopy—and further
divided by other procedures that might have been performed.
Oviduct/ovary
The Oviduct/Ovary subheading (58600-58770) is divided into incision,
laparoscopy, excision, and repair. Fallopian tube procedures are
located in this subheading.
Incision. 
The Incision category is where you will locate the codes for tubal
ligation, which is a permanent, highly effective method of birth
control. The codes are divided according to the type of ligation
performed and the circumstances at the time of the ligation. The types
of ligation are as follows: 
tying
 off the tube with suture material
(ligation), 
removing
 a portion of the tube (transection), and 
blocking
the tube with a device, such as a clip, ring, or band (occlusion). The
circumstance under which the procedure is performed affects the
choice of codes. For example, a procedure can be performed either on
one side (unilateral) or on both sides (bilateral). The procedure can be
performed at different times, such as during the same hospitalization
period as the period of delivery, during the postpartum period, or
during another surgical procedure and these circumstances affect
code assignment.
 
CODING SHOT
Do not use a bilateral procedure modifier (-50) with codes in the
Incision category because the code descriptions indicate “tube(s)” or
“unilateral or bilateral.” Also, do not code tubal ligations performed
by means of a laparoscopic procedure using the Incision category
codes. There are codes for laparoscopic tubal ligation procedures in
the Laparoscopy category of subheading Oviduct/Ovary (58660-
58679).
A ligation can be performed by an abdominal or a vaginal
approach. If a ligation or transection of the fallopian tube(s) is
performed during the same operative procedure as a cesarean
delivery or other intra-abdominal surgery, you report the
ligation/transection using 58611. Code 58611 only reports the tubal
ligation as a component of the more major surgical procedure and is
listed in addition to the primary code.
Often at the time of an abdominal tubal ligation, lysis (loosening) of
adhesions will be performed. Lysis is not bundled into the ligation
code. You report the lysis of adhesions separately, using a Repair
category code such as 58660, if allowed by the third-party payer.
 
CODING SHOT
58740, lysis of adhesions, is performed for restoration of fertility, not
for lysis of adhesions at the time of tubal ligation (such as 58660).
Laparoscopy. 
The procedures described in the Oviduct/Ovary subheading,
Laparoscopy category (58660-58679) are surgical laparoscopy and
always include a diagnostic laparoscopy. If only a diagnostic
laparoscopy was performed, you report 49320 from the Digestive
System subsection, Abdomen, Peritoneum, and Omentum category,
because the scope is being passed into the abdomen for examination
only. Once a definitive procedure such as a tubal ligation has begun,
the examination/diagnostic laparoscopic procedure is bundled into
the surgical procedure. For example, if a diagnostic laparoscopy was
performed and did not lead to a definitive procedure, the diagnostic
laparoscopic code 49320 from the Digestive System subsection would
be reported to describe the procedure of examining the abdomen
using an endoscope. But if a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed
and did lead to a fulguration of the oviducts, code 58670 from the
Female Genital System subsection would be assigned. The terminal
(end or final) procedure dictates the code choice.
The laparoscopy codes are divided on the basis of the procedure
performed, for example, lysis of adhesions, oophorectomy, and lesion
excision.
Excision. 
The Excision category codes report salpingectomy (removal of uterine
tube) or salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of uterine tube and ovary)
and describe unilateral or bilateral procedures that are either complete
or partial. An unbundling issue presents itself with the assignment of
these codes. If either a salpingectomy or salpingo-oophorectomy is
performed with a more major procedure such as a hysterectomy, each
is considered bundled into the more major procedure and not
reported separately.
Repair. 
Within the Repair category are codes for lysis of adhesions and
various repairs to the fallopian tubes. All of the repairs are performed
for the purpose of restoring fertility. Often the repairs are made
through small incisions above the pubic hairline, but they can also be
performed through a laparoscope, so note the approach used for
repairs to the fallopian tubes.
Lysis of adhesions performed on the fallopian tubes 
(salpingolysis)
or the ovaries 
(ovariolysis)
 uses a small incision to insert
instrumentation to complete the repairs. Lysis is a procedure that is
often performed at the time of another, more major procedure and is
usually bundled into the more major procedure. If the lysis takes an
extensive amount of time, you can report the service separately with
supportive documentation indicating the additional time and effort
required to perform the lysis. Another option is to report modifier -22
to indicate that the procedure required more time than normal. The
time to complete the lysis portion of the procedure must be clearly
documented in the operative report.
 
From the Trenches
“Teamwork with other coders gives you support with the ‘problem’ codes. It
is extremely important with the physicians because services must be
presented accurately and correctly to the insurance companies.”
PATRICIA
Ovary
The subheading Ovary (58800-58960) contains the two categories
Incision and Excision. The Incision codes report ovarian incision and
drainage. The Excision codes report ovarian biopsy, cystectomy, and
oophorectomy procedures.
 
QUICK CHECK 21-3
1. 
Review code range 58950-58956. Which codes include the statement
“total abdominal hysterectomy”?
________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
In vitro fertilization
In vitro fertilization means to fertilize an egg outside the body. The
codes in the In Vitro Fertilization category describe several methods
that are used in modern fertility practice. Third-party payers often do
not pay for the fertility treatments. You will have to be certain that
you know the policy of the payer regarding fertility treatments.
Code 58970, aspiration of the ova, is often performed with
ultrasonic guidance and when it is, assign 76948 (Radiology section,
Ultrasonic Guidance Procedures) to report the service.
EXERCISE 21-1
Female Genital System
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Simple destruction of one lesion of the vaginal vestibule
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Biopsy of three lesions of the vulva
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________ × ____________
3 
Closure of rectovaginal fistula, abdominal approach
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Cone biopsy (laser) of cervix with dilation and curettage
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Unilateral, right, laparoscopic, ovarian cystectomy
CPT Code: ____________________
Using the vulvectomy notes in the CPT manual, match each of the
following procedures with its correct definition:
PROCEDURE
THE REMOVAL OF:
6 
simple _____
a 
greater than 80% of the vulvar area
7 
radical _____
b 
skin and deep subcutaneous tissues
8 
partial _____
c 
skin and superficial subcutaneous tissues
9 
complete _____
d 
less than 80% of the vulvar area
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Maternity care and delivery
Format
The Maternity Care and Delivery subsection (59000-59899) is divided
according to type of procedure. As a general rule, the subsection
progresses from antepartum procedures through delivery procedures.
The guidelines are very detailed as to the services included in
antepartum and delivery care, not only to facilitate coding but also to
help guard against unbundling. Notes at the beginning of this
subsection describe, in depth, the services listed in obstetric care. Be
certain to read these notes.
Abortion codes, whether for spontaneous abortion, missed abortion,
or induction of abortion, are at the end of the subsection. Abortion
codes indicate treatment of a spontaneous abortion or missed
abortion, including additional division on the basis of 
trimester
 and
induction of abortion by 
method
. You must be aware of the
gestational age of the fetus to determine the correct code.
Treatment for ectopic pregnancies is based on the site of the
pregnancy, the extent of the surgery, and whether the approach was
by means of laparoscopy or laparotomy (incision through abdominal
wall).
Maternity and delivery
The gestation of a fetus takes approximately 266 days; but when the
estimated date of delivery 
(EDD)
 is calculated, 280 days are often
used, counting the time from the last menstrual period 
(LMP).
 The
gestation is divided into three time periods, called trimesters. The
trimesters are as follows:
■
 
First
LMP to less than 14 weeks 0 days
■
 
Second
14 weeks 0 days to less than 28 weeks 0 days
■
 
Third
28 weeks 0 days until deliver
When a maternity case is uncomplicated, the service codes normally
include the antepartum care, delivery, and postpartum care in the
global package. 
Antepartum care
 is considered to include both the
initial and subsequent history and physical examinations, blood
pressures, patient’s weight, routine urinalysis, fetal heart tones, and
monthly visits to 28 weeks of gestation, biweekly visits from gestation
weeks 29 through 36, and weekly visits from week 37 to delivery
when these services are provided by the same physician. If the patient
is seen by the same physician for a service other than those identified
as part of antepartum care, you would report that service separately.
For example, if a patient in week 32 came to the office with a chief
complaint of cold symptoms, an E/M service code would be reported
for the service and the diagnosis code would further indicate that the
service was provided due to a cold not pregnancy.
Admission to the hospital is bundled into the 
delivery
 codes and
includes the admitting history and examination, management of an
uncomplicated labor, and delivery that is either vaginal or by cesarean
section (including any episiotomy, illustrated in 
Fig. 21-13
, and use of
forceps, as illustrated in 
Fig. 21-14
). Included in 
postpartum care
 are
the hospital visits and/or office visits for 6 weeks after a delivery. If
the postpartum care is complicated or if services 
provided to the
patient during the postpartum period are not generally part of the
postpartum care, you would report those additional services
separately.
 
FIGURE 21–13
Midline (median) episiotomy.
 
FIGURE 21–14
Use of forceps.
Routine obstetric care
There are four codes that describe the global routine obstetric care that
includes the antepartum care, delivery, and postpartum care, based on
the type of delivery:
■
 
59400
Vaginal delivery
■
 
59510
Cesarean delivery
■
 
59610
Vaginal delivery after a previous cesarean delivery
■
 
59618
Cesarean delivery following attempted vaginal delivery after previous cesarean delivery
Two abbreviations commonly found on the delivery record are
VBAC (vaginal birth after cesarean) and VBACS (vaginal birth after
cesarean section), which assist in assigning the correct code.
 
CODING SHOT
Bundled into the vaginal delivery codes are an episiotomy (cutting of
the perineum) and/or the use of forceps during delivery and,
therefore, neither is reported separately.
If the physician provided only a portion of the global routine
obstetric care, the service is reported with codes that describe that
portion of the service as delivery only or postpartum care only, based
on the delivery method. For example, if a physician provided only the
delivery portion of the service, you would report the service with:
■
 
59409
Vaginal delivery only
■
 
59514
Cesarean delivery only
■
 
59612
Vaginal delivery only, after previous cesarean delivery
■
 
59620
Cesarean delivery only, following attempted vaginal delivery after previous cesarean delivery
If the global obstetric care is provided and twins are delivered, the
same codes are reported but, depending on the third-party payer,
modifier -22 (Increased Procedural Services) or -51 (Multiple
Procedures) is added. Usually, if both twins are delivered vaginally,
report 59400 for Twin A and 59409-51 for Twin B. If one is delivered
vaginally and one is delivered cesarean, report 59510 for Twin B and
59409-51 for Twin A. If both are delivered via cesarean, report only
59510 (because only one cesarean was performed).
Delivery Method
Code for TWIN A
Code for TWIN B
Both twins delivered vaginally
59400
59409-51
One twin delivered vaginally
Other twin delivered cesarean
59409-51
 *
59510
Both twins delivered cesarean
59510
*
Codes reported with modifier -51 are always reported as additional codes; never primary.
Some payers, such as Medicaid in Illinois and Texas, require 59409
(vaginal delivery) or 59410 (cesarean delivery) to be reported since
they do not recognize the global obstetric care codes. Each prenatal
visit and the delivery is billed separately. Just another reminder that
knowledge of the payers’ rules will ensure prompt and proper
payments.
TOOLBOX 21-1
 
This is Sally’s first pregnancy and she goes into labor. The baby is in a
breech position but her physician, who has provided all her maternity
care, is able to manipulate the baby to correct cephalic presentation.
An episiotomy is performed during the course of the vaginal
delivery.
Questions
1. 
Does the fact that this is Sally’s first pregnancy affect the choice of
CPT codes? ____________
2. 
Is the episiotomy reported separately? ______________
3. 
Does the manipulation to correct presentation indicate the addition
of modifier -22? ______________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Antepartum services
Amniocentesis
 (59000, 59001) is a procedure in which the physician
inserts a needle into the pregnant uterus to withdraw amniotic fluid
and is only performed after the first 14 weeks of pregnancy. In this
procedure, ultrasound is used to guide the needle, and the
supervision and interpretation (S&I) service is reported using 76946
from the Radiology section, Ultrasonic Guidance Procedures
subsection.
 
CODING SHOT
Radiological procedures require a separate medical document before
you can submit for reimbursement. Modifier -26 may be required
depending on where the service was performed and who owned the
radiology equipment.
Several of the antepartum services require component coding in
order to fully report the services provided. Attention to the code
descriptions and parenthetic statements is necessary to ensure that all
services are reported.
Cordocentesis
 (59012) is a procedure in which fetal blood is drawn.
This procedure is performed under ultrasonic guidance to assess the
status of the fetus. Cordocentesis is not included in normal
antepartum care and should be reported separately. The ultrasonic
guidance (76941) would also be reported separately.
Excision. 
Abdominal 
hysterotomy
 (59100) may be performed to remove a
hydatidiform mole (cystlike structure) (
Fig. 21-15
) or an embryo. If a
tubal ligation is performed at the same time as a hysterotomy, be
certain to report 58611 to indicate the ligation.
 
FIGURE 21–15
Hydatidiform.
An 
ectopic pregnancy
 is one in which the fertilized ovum has
become implanted outside of the uterus, as illustrated in 
Fig. 21-16
.
The surgical treatment for this condition can use either an abdominal
or a vaginal approach (59120-59150); most often, the abdominal
approach is used. If the area has not ruptured, the pregnancy is
removed. If a rupture has occurred, a more extensive procedure is
required. You have to identify the location of the ectopic pregnancy,
the extent of the necessary repair, and the approach to the repair—
vaginal, abdominal, or laparoscopic—to correctly code the procedure.
 
FIGURE 21–16
Implantation sites of ectopic pregnancy.
Postpartum curettage
 is performed within the first 6 weeks after
delivery to remove remaining pieces of the placenta or clotted blood.
Code 59160 is only for use with postpartum curettage. If the curettage
is nonobstetric, report 58120.
Introduction. 
A cervical dilator (such as laminaria, which is a compound on a stick
that swells from surrounding moisture) may be inserted prior to a
procedure in which the cervix is to be dilated; it prepares the cervix
for an abortive procedure or a delivery. The dilator initiates uterine
contractions, which in turn cause cervical dilatation. Induction can be
elective—at the convenience of the patient or the physician—or
required, based on a medical risk factor to the mother or fetus.
Physicians use a scoring system to measure the stage of cervical
ripening, as illustrated in 
Fig. 21-17
.
 
FIGURE 21–17
The Bishop Scoring System of cervical ripening.
To induce cervical ripening (softening and dilation), a preparation
such as Prepidil gel is introduced intracervically using a catheter. The
cervical ripening takes place in the delivery ward.
 
CODING SHOT
You can report 59200 (cervical ripening) with an induced abortion
(59840 or 59841) but not with an abortion induced by means of
vaginal suppositories (59855-59857). Also, do not report an induction
procedure using a code that describes a manual dilation as a part of
the procedure, such as D&C.
Many third-party payers will not pay separately for an induction
procedure, as it is considered to be part of the package for obstetric
care. You will have to check with your payers to determine their
policies regarding the induction procedure.
Repair. 
The obstetric repairs can be to the vulva, vagina, cervix, or uterus. All
of these repairs are also located in the Female Genital subsection, but
here in the Maternity Care and Delivery subsection, the codes are
reported only for repairs made during pregnancy. Repairs made
during delivery or after pregnancy are included in the delivery codes
59400-59622.
 
CODING SHOT
Vaginal repairs can be reported separately only by a physician other
than the attending physician. When the attending physician performs
a procedure such as an episiotomy, it is considered part of the
package for obstetric care. Each third-party payer determines what is
included in the obstetric package.
Abortion services. 
The abortion codes (59812-59857) include services for treatment for
several types of procedures. A 
spontaneous
 abortion (miscarriage) is
one that happens naturally. If the uterus is completely emptied during
the miscarriage and the physician manages the postmiscarriage, the
services are reported with E/M codes. Sometimes the abortion is
incomplete
 and requires intervention to remove the remaining fetal
material (59812). A 
missed
 abortion is one in which the fetus has died
naturally sometime during the first half of the pregnancy but remains
in the uterus. The physician removes the fetal material from the uterus
and reports the service based on the trimester in which the service
was provided (59820-59821). A 
septic
 abortion, whether induced or
missed, has the added complication of infection. The physician
removes the fetal material from the uterus and vigorously treats the
infection (59830).
 
From the Trenches
“Certification means that the coder has been exposed to a lot more knowledge
about coding than simply what is used in a particular workplace. It also
means more money for the coder.”
>
PATRICIA
The induced abortions are those in which the death of the fetus is
brought about by medical intervention (59840-59857). One of three
methods is used: dilation with either curettage (scraping) or
evacuation (removal by means of suction), intra-amniotic injections, or
vaginal suppositories. The selection of the code depends on which of
the three methods was used to accomplish the abortion. Dilation and
curettage is a procedure in which the cervix is dilated and the fetal
material is scraped out by means of a curet. When the dilation and
evacuation method is used, the cervix is dilated and the contents are
suctioned out by means of a vacuum aspirator. The intra-amniotic
injections are of urea or saline, which induces an abortion. Vaginal
suppositories (such as prostaglandin) can be inserted into the cervix,
with or without cervical dilation, to induce an abortion. A
hysterotomy (cutting into the uterus, 59857) may be performed if the
medical intervention by injection or vaginal suppositories fails.
EXERCISE 21-2
Maternity Care and Delivery
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Laparoscopic salpingectomy for tubal ectopic pregnancy
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Version of breech presentation, successfully converted to cephalic
presentation, with normal spontaneous delivery
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
3 
Thirty-year-old woman, 20 weeks’ gestation, with cervical cerclage
by vaginal approach
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 21 learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What is the one procedure code located in the Reproductive System
Procedures subsection? ________________________
2 The procedure described in the Reproductive System Procedures
subsection excludes what organ? ___________________
3 How many codes are found in the Intersex Surgery subsection?
_______________________________________________
4 The anatomic sites of the Female Genital System subsection are
divided on the basis of category of the procedure. What are these
categories?
_________________________________________________________________________________
5 If a total abdominal hysterectomy was performed as well as a
bilateral oophorectomy (removal of ovaries), would it be appropriate
to report both procedure codes?
______________________________________________________________
6 What is the term used to describe the period occurring or existing
before birth? __________________________________
7 The second trimester of a pregnancy begins on week
________________________________________________________.
8 These codes are at the end of the Maternity Care and Delivery
subsection. _______________________________________
9 What is the meaning of the abbreviation VBAC?
___________________________________________________________
Chapter 21, part I, theory
Without the use of reference material, complete the following:
1 The Female Genital System subsection is divided by ____________
site from the vulva to the ovaries.
2 Skene’s glands procedures are reported using codes from which
subsection? _______________________________ System
3 The vulva includes the following:
mons
_______________________________________,
labia
________________________________________,
labia
________________________________________,
bulb of
______________________________________,
vaginal orifice or vestibule, greater and lesser
______________________________________________
glands.
4 The __________ is responsible for determining the complexity of
destruction of lesions of the vulva.
5 Destruction of a lesion is also known as excision.
True   False
6 Would you expect a pathology report to be available for a lesion that
was removed by destruction?
Yes    No
7 The term that describes the removal of a portion of the vulva is a(n)
___________________.
8 The removal of the vulvar area is reported with which two
measures? ____________ and size.
9 Vulvar area tissue removal that involves the skin and superficial
subcutaneous tissues is termed ___________________.
10 Vulvar area tissue removal that involves the skin and deep
subcutaneous tissues is termed ___________________.
11 A(n) ____________ vulvectomy involves less than 80% of the vulva
and a(n) ____________ vulvectomy involves more than 80% of the
vulva.
Chapter 21, part II, practical
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following (Separate
multiple codes with a comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX,
XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers.
XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x
X):
12 Sue Lind, age 29, has a Pap test. The pathology report comes back
positive for malignancy. Her physician recommends and performs a
diagnostic colposcopy. Evidence of further primary malignancy of the
uterus is seen and the physician does a laparoscopically assisted
vaginal hysterectomy 20 days later of a 236-gram uterus. Report only
the hysterectomy and diagnosis code that indicates the medical
necessity of the procedure.
CPT Code: ________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ____________
13 Laparoscopy with fulguration of obstructed oviducts
CPT Code: ________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ____________
14 Oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization from a donor by means of
a follicle puncture
CPT Code: ________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ____________
15 The attending physician, who has provided Sally Fisher’s obstetric
care, performed a cesarean delivery, due to breech presentation, and
ligation of the fallopian tubes (sterilization at the request of the
patient) and routinely followed up with Sally in the postpartum
period. The newborn was an 8 lb 2 oz male.
CPT Codes: __________________ (Cesarean
delivery, routine care); _________________
(Cesarean delivery, tubal ligation)
ICD-10-CM Codes: _____________ (Cesarean
delivery), _______________ (outcome of
delivery), _______________ (sterilization)
16 Colpopexy for displaced uterus using an abdominal approach
CPT Code: ________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ____________
17 Biopsy of three lesions of the vulva. Pathology report later
indicated primary squamous cell carcinoma.
 CPT Code(s): ________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ____________
18 Fitting and supply of a diaphragm with instructions for use
 CPT Code(s): ________________
19 Extensive biopsy of mucosa of vagina, requiring closure
CPT Code: ________________
20 Using instrumentation, the cervical canal was dilated and
examination was completed.
CPT Code: ________________
21 Simple incision and drainage of an abscess of the vulva
CPT Code: ___________________
22 Colpocentesis
CPT Code: ___________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 22
Endocrine and nervous systems
 
“The benefit to working in medical coding is job security, because the
field is constantly expanding.”
Christine A. Patterson
Coder and Biller
 
Reinhart Family Healthcare
 
Monticello, Arkansas
CHAPTER TOPICS
Endocrine System
Nervous System
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Review the Endocrine System subsection format.
2 
Understand the Endocrine System subheadings.
3 
Demonstrate the ability to code Endocrine System services.
4 
Review the Nervous System subsection format.
5 
Understand the Nervous System subheadings.
6 
Demonstrate the ability to code Nervous System services.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Endocrine system
Format
There are nine glands in the endocrine system (
Fig. 22-1
), but only
four
 are included in the Endocrine subsection (60000-60699) of the
CPT manual. The four glands in the Endocrine subsection are:
■
 
Thyroid (60000-60300)
■
 
Parathyroid (60500-60512)
■
 
Thymus (60520-60522)
■
 
Adrenal (60540-60545, 60650)
 
FIGURE 22–1
Endocrine system.
The pituitary and pineal gland codes are in the Nervous System
subsection of the CPT manual, the pancreas codes are in the Digestive
System subsection, and the ovaries and testes codes are in the
respective Female or Male Genital System subsections.
Coding highlights
The Endocrine System subsection (60000-60699) includes two
subheadings of:
■
 
Thyroid Gland
■
 
Parathyroid, Thymus, Adrenal Glands, Pancreas, and Carotid Body
(see 
Fig. 22-2
)
 
FIGURE 22–2
The baroreceptor system for controlling arterial
pressure.
The 
thyroid
 gland is composed of a right and left lobe on either side
of the trachea, just below a large piece of cartilage (thyroid cartilage).
Two of the hormones secreted by the thyroid gland are T3
(triiodothyronine) and T4 (thyroxine). The thyroid gland normally
produces 80% T4 and 20% T3. These hormones are necessary to
maintain the normal level of metabolism in the cells of the body.
Thyroid Function Tests (TFTs) assess the levels of hormones produced
by the thyroid gland. Within the Thyroid Gland subheading in the
CPT manual (60000-60300) there are the categories of Incision,
Excision, and Removal.
Parathyroid
 glands are four small oval bodies located on the dorsal
aspect (back) of the thyroid gland. These glands secrete parathyroid
hormone (PTH). That mobilizes calcium from bones into the
bloodstream, which is necessary for the proper functioning of body
tissues, especially muscles. Within the Parathyroid, Thymus, Adrenal
Glands, Pancreas, and Carotid Body subsection (60500-60699) there
are categories Excision, Laparoscopy, and Other Procedures.
Adrenal
 glands (suprarenal) are two small glands situated one on
top of each kidney. There are two parts to each gland, the cortex
(outer portion) and the medulla (inner portion). The cortex secretes
the hormones corticosteroids, and the medulla secretes the hormones
catecholamines.
The 
thymus
 gland is located behind the breast bone, in front of the
heart, and is involved in maturation (development) of the immune
system. Thymectomy is removal of the thymus and is usually
performed by cutting through the breast bone, similar to heart
surgery.
The 
pancreas
 is an organ that is located behind the stomach, and
the head of the organ is attached to the duodenum (first section of the
small intestine). Although the organ is listed in the heading
(Parathyroid, Thymus, Adrenal Glands, Pancreas, and Carotid Body),
the codes for procedures involving the pancreas are located in the
Digestive System subsection (48000-48999).
The 
carotid body
 is tissue rich in capillaries that act as receptors
located near the bifurcation (splitting into two) of the carotid arteries
as illustrated in 
Fig. 22-2
. The receptors monitor 
arterial oxygen
content and pressure. Tumors that develop in the carotid body may be
excised and the service reported with 60600 or 60605.
All 
endocrine
 glands are ductless, which means they secrete
hormones directly into the bloodstream rather than through ducts
leading to the exterior of the body. Exocrine glands send their
chemical substances into ducts and then out of the body. Examples of
exocrine
 glands are sweat, mammary, mucous, salivary, and lacrimal
(tear ducts).
 
From the Trenches
“I think coders automatically network because no one person can know it all.
We just help each other as best we can. Teamwork is the difference between a
clean, accurate claim for optimum value or a denial.”
CHRISTINE
Thyroid gland incision and excision. 
A thyroidectomy is the removal of all or part of the thyroid gland. The
thyroid gland consists of two lobes, one on each side of the throat,
connected by a narrow band of thyroid tissue (isthmus). The term
“thyroidectomy” can apply to a total removal of the gland (total
thyroidectomy), removal of one or part of one of the lobes
(lobectomy), or the isthmus (isthmusectomy).
A thyroidectomy is performed to assist in treatment of various
thyroid diseases, such as thyroid nodules, hyperthyroidism
(overactive thyroid gland), cancer of the thyroid gland, or
enlargement of the thyroid (goiter) that may cause breathing or
swallowing difficulties.
The amount of thyroid tissue removed is determined prior to the
surgical procedure. The surgeon works closely with an
endocrinologist (a physician specializing in gland tissue disorders) to
determine the thyroid gland function and the amount of tissue to
remove. Usually thyroid function tests (blood tests) and thyroid
scanning are performed before the procedure. For cases in which
thyroid cancer is suspected, a biopsy may also be performed.
A partial thyroid lobectomy is reported with 60210 or 60212 and is
not performed often. For this to be the technique of choice, the lesion
must be located in the upper or lower portion of only one lobe.
Total thyroid lobectomy (60220 or 60225) is typically the least
complex operation performed on the thyroid gland. It is performed
for solitary nodules that are suspected to be cancerous or those that
are indeterminate following biopsy, such as follicular adenomas,
solitary nodules, or goiters that are isolated to one lobe (not common).
The procedure may or may not include an isthmusectomy (removal of
the part that connects the two thyroid lobes) because the code
description states “with or without isthmusectomy.” An
isthmusectomy removes more thyroid tissue than a simple lobectomy
and is performed when a larger margin of tissue is needed to assure
that all suspect tissue has been removed. Subtotal thyroidectomy
(60210, 60212, 60252, 60254) is performed to excise all questionable
tissue on the side of the gland as well as the isthmus and the majority
of the opposite lobe. This operation is typical for small, non-
aggressive thyroid neoplasms. It is also a common operation for
goiters that result in problems in the neck or those that extend into the
chest (substernal goiters).
Total thyroidectomy (60240, 60252) removes all of the thyroid gland
and is often the procedure of choice for thyroid neoplasms that are
larger and/or aggressive. Many surgeons prefer the complete removal
of thyroid tissue in those patients with thyroid neoplasms regardless
of the type of neoplasm.
The technique for a thyroidectomy utilizes a standard neck incision
typically measuring about 4-5 inches in length. Many surgeons
perform this procedure through an incision as small as 3 inches. The
incision is made in the lower part of the central neck and typically
involves the removal of that part of the thyroid that contains the
suspect tissue. The surgeon 
must be careful of the laryngeal nerves
that are very close to the back side of the thyroid and are responsible
for movement of the vocal cords. Damage to a nerve will cause
hoarseness of the voice, which although it is usually temporary, may
be permanent, although this is an uncommon complication (about 1%
to 2%).
A cyst may form on the thyroid and a surgeon may aspirate and/or
inject the cyst. The service is reported with 60300. As with other
aspiration/injection codes, if the surgeon provides an aspiration and
injection, both procedures are reported with one unit of the code
(60300), not two units (60300 × 2).
Parathyroid excision. 
Parathyroidectomy is performed through an incision made above the
collar bone that is approximately 4 inches in length. The four
parathyroid glands are located by the surgeon and removed, a drain is
inserted at either end of the incision, and sutures or surgical clips are
applied.
EXERCISE 22-1
Endocrine System
Using the CPT manual, code the following. You do not need to assign
-RT or -LT to the codes for this exercise.
1 
Excision of an adenoma from posterior aspect of the thyroid gland
CPT Code: ___________________
2 
Surgical removal of a thyroglossal duct cyst
CPT Code: ___________________
3 
Thymectomy using the transthoracic approach, with radical
mediastinal dissection
CPT Code: ___________________
4 
Removal of tumor affixed to the carotid body
CPT Code: ___________________
5 
Partial unilateral thyroid lobectomy, with isthmusectomy
CPT Code: ___________________
6 
Surgical laparoscopy, with partial adrenalectomy, with biopsy,
transabdominal approach
CPT Code: ___________________
7 
Parathyroidectomy, with mediastinal exploration, and sternal split,
with parathyroid autotransplantation
CPT Codes: ___________________,
___________________
8 
Re-exploration of parathyroids, with partial thymectomy,
transcervical approach
CPT Code: ___________________
9 
Excision of carotid body tumor with excision of the carotid artery
CPT Code: ___________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Nervous system
Structure and function of the nervous system
Central nervous and peripheral nervous systems. 
The central nervous system includes the brain and spinal cord. The
peripheral nervous system contains 12 pairs of cranial nerves and 31
pairs of spinal nerves as illustrated in 
Fig. 22-3
. The peripheral
nervous system is divided into the somatic nervous system,
autonomic nervous system, and the enteric 
nervous system. The
somatic nervous system coordinates body movements and receives
external stimuli and is under conscious control. The autonomic
nervous system is divided into the sympathetic (responds to stress),
parasympathetic (constricts pupils, slows heartbeat, dilates blood
vessels, stimulates digestion), and enteric divisions (manages
digestion) and is not under conscious control.
 
FIGURE 22–3
The central nervous system consists of the brain and
spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system consists of nerves that lie
outside the skull and spinal cord.
Brain
■
 
Cerebrum—largest part of the brain.
■
 
Cerebral hemispheres—paired halves of the cerebrum. Each
hemisphere is subdivided into four major lobes named for the
cranial (skull) bones they overlie:
Frontal
Parietal
Occipital
Temporal
■
 
Cerebellum—posterior part of the brain that coordinates the
voluntary muscle movements and maintains balance.
■
 
Cerebral cortex—outer region of the cerebrum (gray matter).
■
 
Fissure—groove in the surface of the cerebral cortex.
■
 
Medulla oblongata—part of the brain located just above the spinal
cord that controls breathing, heartbeat, and blood vessel size.
■
 
Ventricles—reservoirs in the interior of the brain filled with
cerebrospinal fluid.
The following structures connect the cerebrum with the spinal cord:
■
 
Cerebellum
■
 
Pons (part of brain stem)
■
 
Medulla oblongata (part of brain stem)
These terms are important as they relate to correct code assignment.
Spinal cord. 
The spinal cord is a column of nerve tissue extending from the
medulla oblongata to the second lumbar vertebra. Located at the end
of the spinal cord is the cauda equina (a group of nerve fibers found
below the second lumbar vertebra of the spinal column). The cauda
equina carries all the nerves that affect the lower part and limbs of the
body and serves as the pathway for impulses going to and from the
brain.
Meninges. 
The meninges consists of three layers of connective membranes that
surround the brain and spinal cord. The outermost membrane of the
meninges is the dura mater, which is a thick, tough membrane that
contains channels by which blood enters the brain tissue. The
subdural space is located below the dural membrane and contains
multiple blood vessels. The second layer around the brain and spinal
cord is the arachnoid membrane. The third layer of the meninges and
the one closest to the brain and spinal cord is the pia mater.
Neurological diseases of this area are classified as:
■
 
Congenital
■
 
Degenerative, movement, and seizure
■
 
Infectious
■
 
Neoplastic
■
 
Traumatic
■
 
Vascular
Code assignment
The Nervous System subsection (61000-64999) codes report
procedures performed on the brain, spinal cord, nerves, and all
associated parts. The subheadings are divided according to anatomic
site—whether it is a part of the brain or spinal column or a type of
nerve. The subheadings are further divided by 
type
 of procedure. The
codes report services on both the central nervous system and the
peripheral nervous system.
To assign the correct code, the coder must first know the 
purpose
 of
the procedure, because many of the code descriptions indicate the
condition responsible for the procedure. Examples include abscess,
cyst, hematoma, foreign body, tumor, seizure, aneurysm, vascular
malformation, rhinorrhea, hydrocephalus, spondylolisthesis,
herniated disc, meningocele, nerve pain, spasm, neuroma,
neurofibroma, in addition to the technique used for the procedure.
Many of the procedures require radiological supervision and
interpretation. Next, the coder must know the 
location
 of the
procedure within the skull, meninges, or brain.
Skull, meninges, and brain
Punctures, twists, or burr holes. 
The first two categories of codes are Injection, Drainage, or Aspiration
(61000-61070) and Twist Drill, Burr Hole(s), or Trephine (61105-61253)
that deal with conditions that may require holes or openings be made
into the brain to relieve pressure, insertion of monitoring devices,
placement of tubing, injection of contrast material, or to drain a
hemorrhage. A 
ventricular
 puncture (61020-61026) requires a
puncture through the top portion of the skull, while a 
cisternal
puncture (61050, 61055) is an approach at the base of the skull. To
accomplish many of these procedures, twist or burr holes are made
through the skull, which leaves the skull intact except for the small
openings (holes).
Craniectomy/craniotomy. 
Codes in the category Craniectomy or Craniotomy (61304-61576)
describe procedures that deal with incision into the skull with possible
removal of a portion of the skull to open the operative site to the
surgeon. Assignment of these codes is based on the site and condition
(e.g., evacuation of hematoma, supratentorial, subdural, 61312).
As in other subsections, many procedures are bundled into one
craniectomy/craniotomy code. Only by careful attention to code
description can you prevent unbundling surgical procedures and
incorrectly report bundled components separately. Carefully review
the descriptions of these codes before assigning a code.
When craniectomies are performed, it is not uncommon that
additional grafting is required to repair the surgical defect caused by
opening the skull. These grafting procedures are reported separately,
in addition to the major surgical procedure.
Surgery of skull base. 
The 
skull base
 is the area at the base of the cranium where the lobes
of the brain rest. When lesions are located within the skull base, it
often takes the skill of several surgeons working together to perform
surgery dealing with these conditions. 
The procedures located in the
category Surgery of Skull Base (61580-61619) are very involved, taking
many hours to complete. The procedures are divided on the approach
procedure, the definitive procedure, and the reconstruction/repair
procedure.
The 
approach procedure
 (61580-61598) is the method used to obtain
exposure of the lesion (e.g., anterior cranial fossa, middle cranial fossa,
posterior cranial fossa). The approach procedure is the anatomical
location. The 
definitive procedure
 (61600-61616) is what was done to
the lesion (e.g., biopsy, excision, repair, resection). If one physician did
both the approach and the definitive procedures, both would be
reported. For example, a neoplasm is excised at the base of the
anterior cranial fossa, extradural using a craniofacial approach to the
anterior skull base. This would be reported with 61600 for the
procedure (definitive procedure, extradural excision of a neoplasm)
and 61580 for the approach (approach procedure, craniofacial).
Because two procedures (approach and definitive) were performed by
the same surgeon, both codes would be reported for the physician—
61600 and 61580. The most resource-intensive procedure would be
listed first without a modifier (definitive), and the lesser procedure
(approach) would be listed second with modifier -51 appended.
Code 61613 describes the obliteration (total destruction) of a carotid
aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, or carotid fistula and does not
include the approach. Codes 61615 and 61616 report services at the
base of the posterior cranial fossa and describe the resection or
excision of extradural (outside the dura) or intradural (inside the
dura) vascular or infectious lesions with or without graft. The
approach for the resection is reported separately.
Codes in the Repair and/or Reconstruction of Surgical Defects of the
Skull Base (61618, 61619) are performed to rebuild the area used for
entry into the skull. This type of repair is the last step of
reconstruction and is reported separately, only if the service was
documented in the medical record as extensive.
At any point, one or more surgeons may be performing distinctly
different portions of these complex procedures. When one surgeon
performs the approach procedure, another surgeon performs the
definitive procedure, and another surgeon performs the
reconstruction/repair procedure, each surgeon’s services would be
reported with the code for the specific procedure he or she
individually performed. Again, if one surgeon performs more than
one procedure (e.g., the approach procedure, the definitive procedure,
and the reconstruction/repair procedure), each procedure is reported
separately, adding modifier -51 to the secondary procedures. For
example, one surgeon performs the approach procedure (61580),
definitive procedure (61600), and reconstruction/repair (61619). The
services are reported as 61600 (the most resource intense), 61619-51,
and 61580-51.
Aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, or vascular
disease. 
Aneurysms may develop within the brain and require surgical repair.
An arteriovenous malformation is a condition in which the arteries
and veins are not in the correct anatomic position, usually congenital.
Codes to indicate the definitive procedure or repair of these
conditions are located in the category Surgery for Aneurysm,
Arteriovenous Malformation, or Vascular Disease (61680-61711).
These codes are divided on the basis of the 
approach
 and 
method
 of
procedure.
 
CODING SHOT
An electroencephalograph (EEG) is used to monitor currents
emanating from the brain and is usually utilized any time a
procedure on the brain is performed. Report the EEG service
separately with 95950.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunts. 
A 
shunt
 can be considered a draining device that enables fluids to
flow from one area to another. A shunt is necessary when the body is
not able to perform the drainage function on its own. In the case of
cerebrospinal fluid shunts (62180-62258), the fluid is produced in the
ventricles of the brain but does not drain properly and may continue
to accumulate in the brain, building pressure and causing brain
damage. 
Drains or shunts are placed from the area of collection to a
drainage area to keep the fluid level within a normal range. For
instance, code 62223 describes the creation of a shunt from the
ventricle to the peritoneal space (ventriculoperitoneal), as illustrated
in 
Fig. 22-4
. This means that the shunt originates in the ventricle of the
brain and terminates in the peritoneum. Codes in the CSF Shunt
category describe all the various types of shunting procedures,
including placement of shunting devices and subsequent repair,
replacement, and removal. Shunt systems may also be placed to drain
obstructed CSF from the spine.
 
FIGURE 22–4
Ventriculoperitoneal shunt placed for chronic
hydrocephalus.
Spine and spinal cord
The subheading Spine and Spinal Cord (62263-63746) includes codes
for injections, laminectomies, excisions, repairs, and shunting. You
should be familiar with the terminology for parts of the spinal column
(
Fig. 22-5
). A medical dictionary will help you become familiar with
the other parts of the vertebral column, including the lamina,
foramina, vertebral bodies, discs, facets, and nerve roots. The basic
distinction among the codes in these ranges is the 
condition
 (such as a
herniated intervertebral disc versus a neoplastic lesion of the spinal
cord) as well as the 
approach
 (e.g., anterior, posterior, costovertebral).
 
FIGURE 22–5
Vertebral column.
The complexity of the procedure is determined by the condition and
approach. For example, a patient with a herniated disc at L5-S1 would
require less time in surgery for the removal of the disc and
decompression of the nerve root than would a patient with a
neoplastic growth intertwined in the same area, because removal of a
piece of disc would not be as involved as separating a lesion from
multiple components of the spinal column. The approaches differ in
the amount of expertise and time required. A posterior approach
means a surgical opening was formed from the back. An anterior
approach means a surgical opening was formed from the front.
TOOLBOX 22-1
 
Jason requires insertion of a shunt from the ventricle to the peritoneal
space due to a buildup of fluid caused by a congenital malformation
in his brain. The shunt is to move the fluid from the brain to the
abdomen where his body can absorb the excess fluid.
Questions
1. 
When you reference “Shunt, Cerebrospinal Fluid” in the index of
the CPT manual, what direction do you find located there?
________________________________________________________
2. 
Within what ranges of codes in the CPT manual would you locate
the code to report the shunt Jason received?
________________________________
3. 
Which CSF code includes the use of a stereotactic neuroendoscopic
method?
_________________________________________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
When reporting spinal procedures, you must determine the
condition, the approach, whether the procedure was unilateral or
bilateral, and whether multiple procedures were performed.
Often when a laminectomy (removal of a lamina) (
Fig. 22-6
) is
performed, an arthrodesis (surgical fusion of joints) is also performed.
In some cases spinal instrumentation procedures (the use of rods,
wires, and screws to create fusions) are also performed. When
multiple procedures are performed, you must review the operative
report and confirm all procedures are reported.
 
QUICK CHECK 22-1
1. 
This term describes an approach that is from the front:
________________, and this term describes an approach that is from
the back: _____________.
 
FIGURE 22–6
Vertebra viewed from above.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
A 
lumbar puncture
 (62270), or spinal tap, obtains cerebrospinal
fluid by insertion of a needle into the subarachnoid space in the
lumbar region, as illustrated in 
Fig. 22-7
. The fluid is analyzed to
diagnose various conditions. For example, if the fluid is pinkish in
color and contains erythrocytes, there may be a hemorrhage. A
yellowish, cloudy fluid with numerous white blood cells (WBCs) may
indicate an infection.
 
FIGURE 22–7
Lumbar puncture, or spinal tap, in which the
cerebrospinal fluid is obtained by inserting a needle into the
subarachnoid space. The patient lies laterally with knees drawn up to
increase the spaces between the vertebrae.
Notes throughout the Spine and Spinal Cord subsection refer you to
other code ranges for commonly performed additional procedures
(e.g., arthrodesis codes are in the Musculoskeletal subsection).
Remember to use the modifier -51 for multiple procedures if more
than one procedure is performed during the operative session.
 
CODING SHOT
A sensory evoked study, which monitors the central nervous system,
is usually performed with spinal surgery and reported separately
with 95925 (upper limbs) or 95926 (lower limbs).
Destruction by a 
neurolytic agent
 includes chemical denervation
(alcohol or glycerol by injection), radiofrequency (passes a current
through an electrode carefully positioned using fluoroscopy), or
cryogenic surgery (inserting a probe into tissue, with fluoroscopy
guidance, and freezing a region of tissue). Codes 62280-62282 describe
neurolytic substances that are injected/infused at specific anatomic
sites (e.g., subarachnoid and epidural). Code 62280 reports a
subarachnoid injection/infusion of a neurolytic substance. Codes
62281 and 62282 report epidural injection/infusion of a neurolytic
substance based on the location as into the cervical or thoracic region
(62281) or the lumbar, sacral region (62282).
 
CODING SHOT
Codes 62280-62282 include the injection of contrast material;
therefore, the injection of contrast during fluoroscopic guidance and
localization is bundled into the codes and is not reported separately.
Codes 62324 and 62326 include the setup and start of the infusion of
the therapeutic substance(s). When providing the daily maintenance
of the epidural or subarachnoid catheter drug administration, report
the service separately with 01996.
Codes in the 62320-62326 range report injection services based on
the route of administration (not type of substance administered).
These codes exclude injection of a neurolytic substance (nerve
destroying) that are usually reported with codes 62280-62282.
 
CODING SHOT
The 62320-62326 code range includes codes for fluoroscopic guidance.
Extracranial nerves, peripheral nerves, and autonomic
nervous system. 
Nerves are our sensing devices, and they carry stimuli to and from all
parts of the body. Some common procedures performed on nerves
include injection, destruction, decompression, and suture/repair and
are reported with codes from the Extracranial Nerves, Peripheral
Nerves, and Autonomic Nervous System subheading (64400-64999).
The space around the nerves can be injected with anesthetic agents
to cause a temporary loss of feeling (64400-64530). The code is
assigned according to the type of nerve being injected. Nerves may
also be injected to cause destruction of the nerve and permanent loss
of feeling in a specific area of the body (64600-64647, 64680-64681).
Persons with debilitating pain may undergo this type of procedure,
and the diagnoses codes must support the medical necessity of the
procedure. For example, reporting of 64612 (destruction by neurolytic
agent; muscles innervated [supplied] by facial nerve) is supported by
diagnosis codes such as G24.5 (blepharospasm), G24.4 (oral
mandibular dystonia), or G51.3 (hemifacial spasm nerve).
When reporting Introduction/Injection of Anesthetic Agent (Nerve
Block), Diagnostic or Therapeutic codes in the 64400-64530 range, the
coder must know the nerves, nerve groupings, and the interaction of
the nerve with the body system(s). It is also important to identify the
substance injected and the specific nerve the substance was injected
into. Let’s take a closer look at the origin of these nerves and the
interaction each has with the body system(s):
■
 
Trigeminal nerve (5th cranial) emerges from the lateral surface of
the pons. The trigeminal nerve is a sensory nerve that supplies the
face, teeth, mouth and nasal cavity, and a motor nerve that supplies
the muscles of mastication (chewing).
■
 
Facial nerve (7th cranial) consists of the large motor root (supplies
the muscles of facial expression) and a smaller root (nervus
intermedius) that contains the sensory and parasympathetic fibers
of the facial nerve.
■
 
Greater occipital nerve is a spinal nerve originating from the cervical
spinal nerve C2. It supplies stimuli to the scalp, over the ears, and
the parotid gland.
■
 
Vagus nerve (10th cranial) has its origin in the lateral side of
medulla oblongata and supplies sensory fibers to the ear, tongue,
pharynx, and larynx and motor fibers to the pharynx, larynx, and
esophagus.
■
 
Phrenic nerve affects the pleura, pericardium, diaphragm,
peritoneum, and sympathetic plexuses. A plexus is a collection
(aggregate) of nerves and ganglia.
■
 
Cervical plexus (posterior) is a plexus in the posterior cervical
region that is formed by the dorsal rami of the first three or four
cervical spinal nerves.
■
 
Axillary nerve originates from the brachial plexus at the axilla
(armpit) level and is responsible for sensory information from the
shoulder joint and the inferior region of the deltoid muscle.
■
 
Suprascapular nerve has its origin in the brachial plexus at the C5-
C6 level that descends through suprascapular and spinoglenoid
notches and supplies acromioclavicular and shoulder joints, and
supraspinatus muscles.
■
 
Pudendal originates in the sacral plexus at the S2-S4, and sometimes
S5. Divides into the perineal nerve and the dorsal nerve of the penis
(clitoris) distributed to the muscles, skin, and erectile tissue of
perineum.
Injection of anesthetic onto or around these nerves may be
performed to block the pain sensation and provide relief from various
pain, such as neck, lower back, myofascial pain syndrome, or cancer
pain. There are many types of blocks, such as:
■
 
Brachial plexus block for upper extremity pain.
■
 
Celiac plexus (sympathetic nerve) block for pain in the abdomen.
■
 
Ilioinguinal block for pain from the pelvis area (groin, inguinal, or
femoral).
■
 
Intercostal nerve block is for any of the 12 sets of nerves that travel
between the spine and the rib cage.
■
 
Sympathetic blocks the nerves that are located along both sides of
the spine and supplies the limbs and the abdomen.
■
 
Stellate ganglion block is performed for relief of sympathetic pain of
the head or neck. The stellate ganglion is a group of nerves located
on each side of the neck and help control blood vessels, sweat
glands, and indirectly the temperature of the face, arms, and hands.
■
 
Paravertebral nerve block is performed for pain in the cervical,
thoracic, or lumbar regions.
■
 
Somatic or sympathetic nerve injection is a rhizotomy. The agent
injected may be chemical, thermal electrical, or radiofrequency.
 
CODING SHOT
Blocks are considered unilateral; modifier -50 should be used for
bilateral procedures. When more than one level is involved, use the
appropriate add-on code.
Blocks may also be performed when confirming a diagnosis. For
example, a lumbar-sacral paravertebral facet joint block (64490-64495)
is one method utilized to document or confirm pain of the back. The
patient with this condition usually has localized back pain aggravated
by motion of the spine. During the procedure, a needle is placed in the
facet joint or near the facet joint nerve under fluoroscopic guidance
and a local anesthetic agent is injected. After control of the pain has
been obtained, the patient is asked to perform activities that usually
aggravate the pain. If the patient has decreased pain or absence of
pain, the facet joint is identified as the source of the pain and
appropriate treatment may be prescribed.
 
QUICK CHECK 22-2
1. 
Nerve blocks to cause temporary loss of feeling are reported with
this range of codes: ___________________________
2. 
Nerve blocks to cause permanent loss of feeling are reported with
this range of codes: ___________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Neuroplasty
 is the decompression (freeing) of intact nerves (e.g.,
from scar tissue). If nerves receive excessive pressure from a source,
such as scar tissue or displacement of intervertebral disc material,
pain may occur. Movement or freeing of nerves is reported with codes
from the Neuroplasty (Exploration, Neurolysis, or Nerve
Decompression) category (64702-64727). Perhaps the most commonly
known neuroplasty procedure is a carpal tunnel release, reported with
64721, during which the median nerve and the transverse carpal
ligament of the wrist are surgically released (
Fig. 22-8
).
 
FIGURE 22–8
Carpal tunnel release.
Nerves can also be removed or they can be repaired (sutured). The
codes in the Neurorrhaphy (64831-64876) and the Neurorrhaphy with
Nerve Graft (64885-64911) categories describe nerve repairs on the
basis of the specific nerve being repaired. This category also includes
codes that describe grafting on the basis of the size of the graft.
EXERCISE 22-2
Nervous System
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Drainage of a nontraumatic subdural hematoma using burr holes
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Drainage of traumatic subdural hematoma with craniectomy,
supratentorial
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Resection of primary, malignant neoplasm, midline skull base,
extradural, using infratemporal post-auricular approach to middle
cranial fossa
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
Removal of complete cerebrospinal fluid shunt system, with
replacement due to congenital hydrocephalus
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 22 learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 There are nine glands in the human endocrine system; how many
are included in the CPT manual’s Endocrine subsection?
___________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 Endocrine glands secrete hormones directly into the bloodstream.
This means they are ______________________ glands.
3 What is the term that describes the removal of all or part of the
thyroid gland? ___________________________________
4 How many cranial nerve pairs are contained in the peripheral
nervous system? __________
5 The largest part of the brain is the
______________________________________________________________________.
6 What are the basic distinctions among the codes in the Spine and
Spinal Cord subheading? _________________________
Chapter 22, part I, theory
Complete the following:
1 Which gland is involved with the development of the immune
system?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 The pituitary and pineal gland procedure codes are in what
subsection of the Surgery section?
____________________________________________________________________________________________
System
3 The codes for pancreatic procedures are located in what subsection
of the Surgery section?
____________________________________________________________________________________________
System
4 Both subtotal and partial mean something less than
____________________.
5 Twist or ____________________ holes are made through the skull to
accomplish procedures of the brain.
6 The ____________________ procedure is the method used to obtain
exposure to a lesion of the skull base, and the ____________________
procedure is what is done to the lesion.
7 CSF means ____________________ (two words).
8 The most commonly known neuroplasty procedure is a(n)
____________________ (two words) release.
9 This term describes the location of the bifurcation of the carotid
artery in the neck: ____________________ (two words)
10 Would you report separately the additional grafting required to
repair the surgical defect caused by a craniectomy?
Yes No
Chapter 22, part II, practical
Code the following cases using the CPT manual (Separate multiple codes
with a comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX, XXXXX. Make
sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers. XXXXX-XX. Make
sure to indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x X):
11 Total thyroidectomy
CPT Code: ____________________
12 Surgical laparoscopy with partial adrenalectomy using a
transabdominal approach
CPT Code: ____________________
13 Parathyroidectomy with mediastinal exploration
CPT Code: ____________________
14 Stereotactic creation of a thalamus lesion with multiple staging
CPT Code: ____________________
15 Torkildsen type operation with CSF shunt insertion
CPT Code: ____________________
16 Implantation of a tunneled epidural catheter for long-term
administration of medication
CPT Code: ____________________
17 Partial resection of a single segment of a vertebral (cervical) body
using an anterior approach with decompression of the spinal cord and
nerve roots
CPT Code: ____________________
18 Therapeutic injection of the greater occipital nerve with an
anesthetic agent
CPT Code: ____________________
19 Complete transection of the facial nerve
CPT Code: ____________________
20 Nerve graft of a single strand of nerve, 5 cm in length, to the foot,
procedure included procurement of graft
CPT Code: ____________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 23
Eye, ocular adnexa, auditory, and
operating microscope
 
“Most will struggle with terminology, but asking questions will save and
often benefit your career. Take my word for it, the best thing you can
do is keep asking questions until you understand.”
Thomas Mobley, CPC, COC, CEDC, CIRCC, CPC-I
Healthcare Coding Consultants, LLC
 
Gilbert, Arizona
CHAPTER TOPICS
Eye and Ocular Adnexa
Auditory System
Operating Microscope
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Review the Eye and Ocular Adnexa subsection.
2 
Understand the Eye and Ocular Adnexa subheadings.
3 
Demonstrate the ability to code Eye and Ocular Adnexa services.
4 
Review the Auditory System subsection format.
5 
Understand Auditory System subheadings.
6 
Demonstrate the ability to code Auditory System services.
7 
Review reporting use of an operating microscope.
8 
Demonstrate the ability to report the use of an operating
microscope.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Eye and ocular adnexa
Format
The Eye and Ocular Adnexa subsection (65091-68899) includes the
subheadings Eyeball, Anterior Segment, Posterior Segment, Ocular
Adnexa, and Conjunctiva. There are the typical incision, excision,
repair, and destruction categories but also some that are unique. For
example, the subheading Eyeball includes categories for both
Removal of Eye (65091-65114) and Removal of Foreign Body (65205-
65265), although you would expect to find all removal codes in a
removal category.
From the Trenches
 
“The keys to long-term success are flexibility and a lust for knowledge. This
field is ever evolving and growing, for to remain relevant you must embrace
that change.”
TOM
 
CODING SHOT
Remember to use modifier -50 (bilateral procedure) when the
procedure is performed on both eyes. Modifiers -RT and -LT may be
assigned for bilateral procedures of anatomic sites that are in pairs;
i.e., eyes, breasts, legs, arms, etc.
In this section are codes that include previous surgery to the eye.
For example, in the subheading Ocular Adnexa, 67331 is reported for
patients undergoing strabismus surgery who have had previous eye
surgery or injury. Also, the category Prophylaxis (preventive
treatment) (67141, 67145), under the subheading Posterior Segment,
has notes regarding the assignment of these codes. The Prophylaxis
codes include all the sessions in a treatment period. The Destruction
codes in this subcategory include “one or more sessions.” Read the
code descriptions carefully so you know which elements are included
in the code because what is or is not included in the code descriptions
varies greatly.
As in all sections of the CPT manual, there are directional notes
throughout that will help you think about what defines a particular
code. For example, code 67850 is for the “Destruction of lesion of lid
margin (up to 1 cm).” This description includes a note in parentheses:
“(For Mohs micrographic surgery, see 17311-17315).” This helpful
note gives you the category of codes to refer to if the lesion
destruction was performed using Mohs micrographic surgery.
Refer to 
Figs. 23-1 through 23
-
4
 as you prepare to code services to
the eye and ocular adnexa.
 
FIGURE 23–1
Eye and ocular adnexa.
 
FIGURE 23–2
Lacrimal apparatus.
 
FIGURE 23–3
Eyelid.
 
FIGURE 23–4
Two tarsi.
Eyeball
Removal of eye. 
The Removal of Eye category contains codes to report 
evisceration
,
which is removal of the contents of the globe while leaving the
extraocular muscles and sclera intact (65091, 65093); 
enucleation
,
which is removal of the eye while leaving 
the orbital structures intact,
(65101-65105); and 
exenteration
, which is removal of the eye, adnexa,
and part of the bony orbit (65110-65114). The codes in the Removal of
Eye category are divided based on which of these procedures was
performed, if an implant was inserted, and in the case of the
exenteration, if the bony orbit was removed or a muscle or
myocutaneous flap was performed. These codes do not report skin
grafting to the orbit. When the operative report indicates skin grafting,
report the service separately with codes from the Integumentary
System (15120/15121 or 15260/15261). If the eyelid was repaired
deeper than skin level, refer to the reconstruction codes 67930/67935
(partial or full thickness repair).
 
QUICK CHECK 23-1
Match the term with the correct description:
1. 
Evisceration _____
2. 
Enucleation _____
3. 
Exenteration _____
a. 
Removal of the eye, adnexa, bony structure
b. 
Removal of the contents of eyeball, structure intact
c. 
Removal of eyeball only, other structures intact
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Secondary implant(s) procedures. 
Implants may be placed inside the muscular cone (ocular implant or
fake eye) or outside the muscular cone (orbital implant) as illustrated
in 
Fig. 23-5
. The ocular implant is the artificial eye, and the orbital
implant replaces the orbit that was occupied by the eyeball before
removal. With some implants, the muscles are attached to the implant
to enable the artificial eye to move and thus appear more natural. The
codes in the 65125-65155 range report a subsequent implantation of
ocular implants based on the type of service provided with the
implant, such as grafting or attachment of muscles to implant.
Removal of an ocular implant is reported with 65175. An orbital
implant is a cosmetic device that covers the outer portion of the eye
and is also known as a scleral shell prosthesis. Orbital implant
insertion is reported with 67550 and removal with 67560.
 
FIGURE 23–5
Ocular and orbital implants.
Removal of foreign body. 
Note the extensive list of parenthetical notes preceding 65205. Take
time now to read these notes as they list important concepts that you
need to know. The removal codes are for foreign bodies that are
located in the external eye or the intraocular eye. A 
slit lamp
 is a low-
powered microscope with a high-intensity light source that focuses
the light as a long narrow beam (slit) and is used to examine eyes (
Fig.
23-6
). Note that the only difference between 65220 and 65222 is
whether a slit lamp is or is not utilized.
 
FIGURE 23–6
A slit lamp is a microscope with a light attached. The
name is derived from the adjustable light beam.
Repair of laceration. 
The repair codes are assigned to report laceration repair based on
where the laceration is located (conjunctiva, cornea, and/or sclera).
Code 65286 reports the application of tissue glue for a perforation of
the eyeball.
Anterior segment
The anterior segment includes the cornea, anterior chamber, anterior
sclera, iris, ciliary body, and lens.
Cornea. 
The cornea is the transparent part of the eye. The cornea may be the
site of a superficial lesion that is completely removed and reported
with 65400. If only a portion of the corneal lesion was removed for
pathology analysis, report the service as a biopsy with 65410.
A 
keratoplasty
 is repair of the cornea. Codes 65710-65756 report
keratoplasty based on the type of procedure performed and include
grafts and preparation of donor material. A penetrating keratoplasty
(65730-65755) is the removal of the full thickness of the cornea and
replacement with donor cornea. A lamellar keratoplasty (65710) is a
procedure in which only a thin layer of the cornea is removed and
replaced with donor cornea. 
Aphakia
 is absence of the lens of the eye,
and 
pseudophakia
 is the presence of an artificial lens after cataract
surgery. These terms are in three of the keratoplasty code
descriptions.
Anterior chamber. 
The anterior chamber of the eye is a fluid-filled (aqueous humor)
space, located behind the cornea and in front of the iris. The categories
of Incision (65800-65880), Removal (65900-65930), and Introduction
(66020-66030) are for procedures performed on the anterior chamber
of the eye.
Paracentesis
 is the removal of fluid. When a physician performs
paracentesis of the anterior chamber of the eye, a needle is inserted
into the anterior chamber and fluid is withdrawn. The fluid may be
withdrawn for diagnostic purposes (65800) or for therapeutic
purposes (65810-65815). If an injection procedure is also performed,
report 66020 or 66030.
Goniotomy
 (65820) is a surgical procedure that utilizes an
instrument called a goniolens. This procedure may be performed for
congenital glaucoma, a condition in which the optic nerve at the back
of the eye may be damaged and cause a loss of vision, especially
peripheral vision. A note following code 65820 directs the coder not to
use modifier -63 (procedure performed on infants less than 4 kg) with
the code.
Codes for severing adhesions or scar tissue from the anterior
chamber of the eye are based on the location of the adhesion or scar
tissue (65860-65880). 
Posterior synechiae
 are adhesions of the iris to
the lens of the eye, and 
anterior synechiae
 are adhesions of the iris to
the cornea. Severing of the adhesions is performed using either laser
(66821) or incisional technique.
 
QUICK CHECK 23-2
Match the term with the definition:
1. 
Pseudophakia _____
2. 
Goniotomy _____
3. 
Keratoplasty _____
4. 
Paracentesis _____
a. 
Removal of fluid
b. 
Presence of artificial lens
c. 
Surgical procedure
d. 
Repair of cornea
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Anterior sclera. 
The sclera is the white, fibrous outer layer of the eyeball and the
anterior sclera is the front part of the eye. The anterior sclera may be
the site of lesions that are excised (66130) by incision of the
conjunctiva to gain access to the lesion. Depending on the size of the
lesion, the area of the sclera may not require sutures.
Sometimes, the flow of the aqueous humor is not absorbed or too
much fluid is produced, and a surgeon may perform a fistulization
(creation of a passage) of the sclera to decrease the 
pressure. The
fistulization can be created by means of removal of a portion of the
sclera and iris (e.g., 66150), thermocauterization (e.g., hot probe,
66155), or punch or scissor removal (e.g., 66160). A trabeculotomy ab
externo or trabeculectomy ab externo (e.g., 65850, 66170, 66172) is a
surgical procedure in which the trabecular meshwork (iris-scleral
junction, drains aqueous humor) is reshaped or punctured. This
procedure may be performed as a treatment for glaucoma.
Iris, ciliary body. 
The ciliary body is located behind the iris (colored part of the eye) and
produces aqueous humor. The smooth muscle of the ciliary body
attaches to the lens. An iridectomy is usually performed for removal
of a lesion (66600) or as a treatment for glaucoma (66625, 66630) by
creation of an opening to drain aqueous humor. If the
iridotomy/iridectomy is performed by means of laser, report the
procedure with 66761. If an iridoplasty is performed by means of
photocoagulation, report the procedure with 66762.
Lens. 
A common procedure performed on the lens of the eye is cataract
removal. Cataract removal and lens replacements (66830-66990) utilize
one of two different approaches or techniques:
■
 
Extracapsular cataract extraction (66984) (ECCE) is partial removal
of the capsule and is the most common method. It removes the hard
nucleus of the lens in one piece and the soft cortex in multiple
pieces. The posterior lens capsule is left in place.
■
 
Intracapsular cataract extraction (66983) (ICCE) is the removal of the
lens and surrounding lens capsule, which removes the cataract in
one piece.
Today, most cataract surgery is performed using
phacoemulsification, which dissolves the hard nucleus by ultrasound,
then removes the soft cortex in multiple pieces.
Extraocular muscles. 
Under the subheading of Ocular Adnexa are codes for strabismus
surgery, which corrects muscle misalignment. The codes are divided
based on repair of vertical (67314, 67316) or horizontal (67311, 67312)
muscles and are reported by the number of muscles repaired. Vertical
muscles move the eye up and down, while the horizontal muscles
move the eye side to side.
Orbit. 
Under the subheading Orbit are codes for orbitotomy and fine needle
aspiration. The orbitotomy codes are divided based on the approach
and if a bone flap was or was not placed. Orbitotomy that is
performed without a bone flap and with either a frontal or
transconjunctival approach (illustrated in 
Fig. 23-7
) is reported with
codes 67400-67414. Orbitotomy performed with a bone flap and with a
lateral approach is reported with codes 67420-67450. The codes for a
transcranial orbitotomy are located in the Nervous System subsection
(61330-61333). Within the Orbit subheading there is also a code
(67415) for fine needle aspiration of the orbital contents, and it is
usually performed as a biopsy method for an orbital mass.
 
FIGURE 23–7
Transconjunctival approach.
Eyelids. 
The Eyelids subheading includes procedures performed by incision,
excision, destruction, and tarsorrhaphy (suturing the eyelids
together). There are also codes to report eyelid repair and
reconstruction. Eyelid repairs include ectropion (outward
sagging/turning, 67914-67917) as illustrated in 
Fig. 23-8
 and entropion
(inward turning, 67921-67924) illustrated in 
Fig. 23-9
.
 
 
FIGURE 23–8
Ectropion is an outward sagging of the eyelid.
 
 
FIGURE 23–9
Entropion is an inward turning of the eyelid. (Note that
the patient in 
B
 has undergone corneal transplantation.)
HCPCS modifiers are added to the procedure code to indicate the
specific eyelid:
■
 
-E1
upper left eyelid
■
 
-E2
lower left eyelid
■
 
-E3
upper right eyelid
■
 
-E4
lower right eyelid
Conjunctiva. 
The Conjunctiva subheading includes Incision and Drainage (68020,
68040), Excision and/or Destruction (68100-68135), Injection (68200),
Conjunctivoplasty (68320-68340), and the Lacrimal System (68400-
68850). Conjunctivoplasty (68326-68328) involves reconstruction of the
cul-de-sac with a conjunctival graft or rearrangement. Lacrimal
System (see 
Fig. 23-2
) procedures includes incision, excision, repair,
and probing. The most common procedure performed is nasolacrimal
duct probing generally due to an obstruction and reported with 68810
or 68811.
EXERCISE 23-1
Eye and Ocular Adnexa
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Blood clot removal from anterior segment of the left eye
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
New patient strabismus surgery involving the superior oblique
muscle of the right eye
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Xenon arc used in three sessions to prevent retinal detachment of
left eye
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Corneal incision for revision of earlier procedure that resulted in
astigmatism of right eye
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Removal of left eye, with implant, muscles attached to implant
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Auditory system
Format
The Auditory System subsection (69000-69979) is divided into the
subheadings External Ear, Middle Ear, Inner Ear, and Temporal Bone,
Middle Fossa Approach. The first three subheadings represent the
anatomic divisions of the auditory system: external, middle, and inner
ear (
Fig. 23-10
). The categories listed under each subheading include
introduction, incision, excision, removal, repair, and other procedures,
depending on the particular subheading. The subheading Temporal
Bone, Middle Fossa Approach (69950-69979) contains codes that
describe various surgical procedures in which the surgeon makes an
incision anterior to the auricle and extends superiorly, exposing the
temporalis muscle. Through this incision, the surgeon performs a
craniotomy and exposes the brain. The surgeon then repairs the nerve,
removes a tumor, or otherwise treats the area.
 
FIGURE 23–10
Auditory system.
External ear
Incision. 
The external ear may be the site of an abscess or hematoma, and the
incision and drainage may be simple (69000) or complicated (69005). If
the abscess drained is within the auditory canal, report the service
with 69020. Be careful when reporting 69020 as it can be bundled into
a major procedure and not reported separately.
Excision. 
Codes for the external ear include biopsy by location of external ear
(69100) or external auditory canal (69105), excision of the external ear,
either partially or complete (69110, 69120). If the external ear was
reconstructed after the excision, report the repair with split thickness
autograft codes (15120, 15121) from the Integumentary System based
on the square centimeters used in the repair.
Exostosis
 is a bony growth and when present in the external
auditory canal, it is termed “surfer’s ear,” because it is associated with
chronic cold water exposure. An incision is made behind the ear to
gain access to the canal, and the bony growth is excised (69140).
Removal of foreign body. 
With the shape of the ear, it is easy to see how foreign bodies and
cerumen (earwax) can become lodged in the external ear. When a
foreign body is removed from the ear, the code reported is based on
whether general anesthesia was or was not used (69200, 69205). Ear
lavage (69209) is the unilateral removal of impacted cerumen (ear
wax) using irrigation/lavage. Removal of the cerumen with
instrumentation is reported with 69210 (if bilateral then append with
modifier -50).
 
CODING SHOT
You may not report 69209 on the same day as code 69210.
NOTE:
 Medicare does not allow modifier -50 for CPT codes 69209
and 69210.
Repair. 
An 
otoplasty
 is a procedure performed for a protruding ear that may
or may not include a decrease in the size of the ear. This procedure is
usually performed with the use of conscious sedation, which is
included in 69300. When an otoplasty is performed bilaterally,
modifier -50 is added to code.
Reconstruction of the external auditory canal
(canalplasty/canaloplasty) may be performed for conditions such as
stenosis due to injury or infection (69310) or for a congenital defect
(69320). Canaloplasty is bundled into some middle ear repair codes,
such as 69631-69646 and not reported separately.
Middle ear
Myringotomy and tympanostomy. 
The eustachian tube connects the middle ear to the back of the throat
and allows for drainage of fluid. When a eustachian tube
dysfunctions, fluid collects in the middle ear. The tube can also
become inflamed from allergies or infection. Eustachian tube
dysfunction is a fairly common condition in children, because the tube
does not always mature to the level of normal function and therefore
does not function properly. The fluid or inflammation prevents air
from entering the middle ear, resulting in a pressure increase in the
middle ear. Surgical intervention is an inflation of the eustachian tube
with access through the nose (transnasal). 
Myringotomy
 is the
incision into the tympanic membrane (69420, 69421) and reinflation of
the eustachian tube. 
Tympanostomy
 is the insertion of a small plastic
or metal tube (PE [pressure equalization] tube) that allows the fluid to
drain (69433, 69436). The tubes may later be removed, fall out
naturally, or sometimes be left in place. Surgical removal of a
ventilation tube is reported with 69424, which is a procedure that
requires general anesthesia. Ventilation tube removal is bundled into
many major procedures, in which case the removal is not reported
separately.
 
CODING SHOT
Code 69424 is unilateral, so if the tubes were removed bilaterally, add
modifier -50.
TOOLBOX 23-1
 
PE tubes are often recommended for children with repeated ear
infections (acute otitis media) or those who have hearing loss due to
constant middle ear fluid (otitis media with effusion). In fact, PE
tubes are the most common childhood surgery.
Questions
1.
 The surgical procedure in which PE tubes are inserted is a(n)
_______________________________.
2.
 If an ear tube was not inserted, the incision into the tympanic
membrane would do what in just a few days?
____________________
3.
 The tiny PE tubes allow what to enter the middle ear?
______________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Excision. 
Middle ear excision procedures include antrotomy (simple
mastoidectomy, 69501), mastoidectomy (complete, modified radical,
or radical, 69502-69511), polyp removal (69540), and tumor removal
(69550-69554).
Also included in the Excision category is a petrous apicectomy. The
petrous apex (
Fig. 23-11
) of the temporal bone may be the site of
infection (petrous apicitis) that can lead to more complicated infection,
such as brain abscess or meningitis. Sometimes, to remove the infected
bone, a mastoidectomy is performed and is included in the petrous
apicectomy code 69530.
 
FIGURE 23–11
The bony structure is the petrous bone.
Repair. 
Middle ear repair procedures include revision mastoidectomies based
on the extent of the procedure. For example, a simple mastoidectomy
is performed on a patient with cholesteatoma of the middle ear. A
cholesteatoma
 is a benign growth of skin in an abnormal location, in
this case in the middle ear. The growth may reoccur and the surgeon
may perform a complete mastoidectomy (69601). If the disease has
progressed to the point where the tympanic membrane is damaged
and requires repair, the procedure is reported with 69604.
The two major divisions in the tympanoplasty codes are with or
without removal of the mastoid bone (mastoidectomy). When no
mastoidectomy is performed, choose the code from the 69631-69633
range, based on the extent of the procedure. When a mastoidectomy is
performed, report the service with codes from the 69641-69646 range,
based on the extent of the procedure. The 
ossicular chain
 is the bones
of the ear that include the malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and stapes
(stirrup). The chain may be eroded and repaired as a part of a
tympanoplasty (69632 or 69642). The repair may be so extensive that it
may require the use of prosthesis, such as a partial ossicular
replacement prosthesis (PORP, incus and malleus are absent or
damaged) or total ossicular replacement prosthesis (TORP, incus and
arch of the stapes are damaged, or the malleus, incus and arch of the
stapes are absent). PORP and TORP are reported with 69633 or 69637,
depending upon other repairs performed during the tympanoplasty.
Inner ear
Incision and/or destruction. 
A 
labyrinth
 is a cavelike structure, located in the inner ear. The
labyrinth is dominated by two fluid-filled spaces that contain
endolymph and perilymph. These spaces contain the nerve tissue
responsible for hearing and balance. When the pressure within the
space is altered, vertigo, ringing in the ears, and hearing loss may
occur. A 
labyrinthotomy
 is a procedure in which the labyrinth is
surgically incised and various procedures performed to return the
labyrinth to functional condition. Code 69801 is reported for a
labyrinthotomy.
Excision. 
A 
labyrinthectomy
 is a procedure in which the incus and stapes are
removed. If a transcanal approach is used, report 69905. If a
postauricular incision (behind the ear) is used as the approach, report
69910.
Introduction. 
A 
cochlear device implant
 (
Fig. 23-12
) is a computerized device that
restores partial hearing in those who are profoundly hearing
impaired. A receiver on the outside of the skin behind the ear picks up
sound waves. The receiver is placed over the transmitter, which is
surgically implanted under the skin behind the ear. A sound
processor is connected to an electrode implanted between the
processor and the cochlea, and it receives a signal from the transmitter
and transfers the signal to the cochlear nerve. The implantation of the
cochlear device is reported with 69930.
 
FIGURE 23–12
Cochlear implant device.
Temporal bone, middle fossa approach. 
The middle fossa approach is used by surgeons to excise acoustic
neuromas, to decompress the facial nerve (proximal temporal), and
repair nerves in the vestibular labyrinth. The codes in the Temporal
Bone, Middle Fossa Approach subheading report removal of the
vestibular nerve (69950), relief of pressure (decompression) of the
facial nerve and/or repair (69955), decompression of the internal
auditory canal (69960), and removal of tumors of the temporal bone
(69970).
Operating microscope
An operating microscope (
Fig. 23-13
) is used in microsurgical
procedures and is reported separately with add-on code 69990, unless
the code indicates the inclusion of use of an operating microscope.
This does not include magnifying loupes (
Fig. 23-14
) that are used to
enlarge the area being viewed.
 
QUICK CHECK 23-3
1. 
The operating microscope code is used only with procedures on the
ear.
True or False?
 
FIGURE 23–13
The operating microscope allows for visualization of
minute structures, such as nerve fibers and blood vessels.
 
FIGURE 23–14
Magnifying loupes are produced in a range of powers.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 23-3
Ear and Operating Microscope
Complete the following:
1 
This is a bony growth that is also known as surfer’s ear:
____________________
2 
For a protruding ear, the surgeon may perform this procedure:
____________________
3 
This is a benign growth of the skin in an abnormal location, such as
the middle ear: ____________________
4 
The code to report the use of an operating microscope in addition to
the procedure is ____________________.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Code 69990 is in a subsection of a single code following the
Auditory System subsection. This code is an add-on code and is never
reported alone; rather, it is reported with the procedure in which the
operating microscope was used. Code 69990 is assigned with codes
from any subsection within the Surgery section. Read the extensive
notes preceding the code to better understand when this code should
or should not be reported.
EXERCISE 23-2
Auditory System
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Left labyrinthotomy with cryosurgery with multiple perfusions,
transcanal
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Bilateral insertion of pressure equalization tubes, using general
anesthesia
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
3 
Transcranial approach with sectioning of the left vestibular nerve
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Reconstruction of the right external auditory canal, due to injury
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Establishment of an opening in the inner wall of the right inner ear,
semicircular canal
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 23 learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 There are codes under the subheading Posterior Segment for
prophylaxis treatment. What is the meaning of the term 
prophylaxis
?
________________________________________________________________________________________
2 A low-powered microscope with a high-intensity light source used
to examine eyes with a long narrow beam is called a(n)
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________.
3 What is a common procedure performed on the lens of the eye, and
what are the two different approaches? ____________
_______________________________________________
__________________________________________________
4 What is the procedure performed for a protruding ear?
______________________________________________________
5 What connects the middle ear to the back of the throat and allows
for drainage of fluid? ____________________________
6 What is the procedure for removing the incus and stapes bones?
_______________________________________________
7 The code for operating microscope has a + symbol. What does this
symbol designate? _____________________________
8 What types of procedures employ the use of an operating
microscope? __________________________________________
Chapter 23, part I, theory
Complete the following:
Match the terms for the ossicular chain:
1 hammer _____
a. 
Incus
2 anvil _____
b. 
Stapes
3 stirrup _____
c. 
Malleus
4 This is a benign growth of skin in an abnormal location.
a cholesteatoma
b glucogonomas
c TSH-oma
d schwannoma
5 This is the removal of the eye, adnexa, and part of the bony orbit.
a evisceration
b enucleation
c exenteration
d none of the above
6 This is a low-powered microscope with a high-intensity light source
that focuses the light as a long narrow beam and is used to examine
the eyes.
a goniolens
b otoscope
c ophthalmoscope
d slit lamp
7 This is a cosmetic implant that covers the outer portion of the eye
and is also known as a scleral shell prosthesis.
a ocular
b orbital
c conjunctival
d intraocular
8 This is a bony growth that is also known as surfer’s ear because it is
associated with chronic cold water exposure.
a vestibular
b mastoiditis
c exostosis
d labyrinthitis
9 During this procedure, small plastic or metal tubes are inserted
through the tympanic membrane to allow for the drainage of fluid.
Later the tubes may be removed, fall out naturally, or be left in place.
a myringotomy
b antrotomy
c tympanostomy
d mastoidectomy
10 This is a cavelike structure that is dominated by two fluid-filled
spaces.
a labyrinth
b auricle
c external acoustic meatus
d malleus
Chapter 23, part II, practical
Code the following cases using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals (Separate
multiple codes with a comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX,
XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers.
XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x
X):
11 Excision of corneal lesion of right eye
CPT Code: ____________________
12 Iridectomy with corneal section for removal of lesion from left eye
CPT Code: ____________________
13 Left lamellar keratoplasty with replacement of a thin layer of the
cornea with donor cornea
CPT Code(s): ____________________
14 Corneal biopsy of the right eye
CPT Code(s): ____________________
15 Diagnostic paracentesis of aqueous in the anterior chamber of the
left eye
CPT Code: ____________________
16 A one stage, right eye ECCE with insertion of intraocular lens
prosthesis using a manual technique
CPT Code: ____________________
17 A one stage ICCE of the left eye with insertion of intraocular lens
prosthesis
CPT Code: ____________________
18 Iridectomy for removal of a primary lesion by means of corneal
section, right
CPT Code: ____________________
19 A male patient, age 69, with type 2 diabetes and progressive
diabetic retinopathy resulting in retinal hemorrhage. The physician
provides three sessions of photocoagulation to his right eye over the
course of 2 weeks
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ____________________,
____________________
20 Repair of a detached right retina by means of an encircling
procedure and including scleral dissection, implant, cryotherapy, and
drainage of subretinal fluid
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ____________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 24
Radiology
 
“Try not to stay in just one specialty. Become educated and learn
other specialties so you can grow in all types of coding.”
Patricia Champion, CPC
Licensed PMCC Instructor, Educator/Trainer
 
AAPC National Advisory Board
 
Nashville, Tennessee
CHAPTER TOPICS
Format
Radiology Terminology
Terms
Planes
Guidelines
Diagnostic Radiology
Breast, Mammography
Diagnostic Ultrasound
Radiation Oncology
Nuclear Medicine
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Demonstrate an understanding of Radiology terminology.
2 
Analyze the elements of component coding in reporting radiology
services.
3 
Identify elements of the global procedure.
4 
State the appropriate coding of contrast material.
5 
Explain the format of the Radiology section.
6 
Demonstrate the ability to code Radiology services and procedures.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Format
Radiology
 is the branch of medicine that uses radiant energy to
diagnose and treat patients. The term originally referred to the use of
x-rays to produce radiographs but is now commonly applied to all
types of medical imaging. A physician who specializes in radiology is
a 
radiologist.
 Radiologists can provide services to patients
independent of or in conjunction with another physician of a different
specialty. The Radiology section of the CPT manual is divided into
subsections:
■
 
Diagnostic Radiology (Diagnostic Imaging)
■
 
Diagnostic Ultrasound
■
 
Radiologic Guidance
■
 
Breast, Mammography
■
 
Bone/Joint Studies
■
 
Radiation Oncology
■
 
Nuclear Medicine
Radiology terminology
The suffix 
-graphy
 means “making of a film” using a variety of
methods. 
Radiography
 is a broad term used to indicate any number of
methods used by radiologists to do diagnostic testing. The following
exercise will familiarize you with some of the numerous radiographic
procedures in the CPT manual.
EXERCISE 24-1
Radiology Terminology
The following words end in “-graphy,” meaning “making of a film.”
For example, in angiocardiography, “angio” means vessels and
“cardio” means heart, so angiocardiography is the making of a film
of the heart and vessels. What do the other “-graphy” words mean?
angiocardiography
heart and vessels
1 
aortography
______________________________________________________________________________________
2 
arthrography
______________________________________________________________________________________
3 
cholangiopancreatography
___________________________________________________________________________
4 
cholangiography
____________________________________________________________________________________
5 
cystography
______________________________________________________________________________________
6 
dacryocystography
_________________________________________________________________________________
7 
duodenography
___________________________________________________________________________________
8 
echocardiography
_________________________________________________________________________________
9 
encephalography
__________________________________________________________________________________
10 
epididymography
___________________________________________________________________________________
11 
hepatography
____________________________________________________________________________________
12 
hysterosalpingography
______________________________________________________________________________
13 
laryngography
_____________________________________________________________________________________
14 
lymphangiography
_________________________________________________________________________________
15 
myelography
______________________________________________________________________________________
16 
pyelography
______________________________________________________________________________________
17 
sialography
_______________________________________________________________________________________
18 
sinography
_______________________________________________________________________________________
19 
splenography
____________________________________________________________________________________
20 
urography
________________________________________________________________________________________
21 
venography
______________________________________________________________________________________
22 
vesiculography
___________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Terms
Here are just a few more radiographic terms for your review:
1. 
Fluoroscopy
 is an x-ray procedure that allows the visualization of
internal organs in motion. It uses real-time video images. After x-rays
pass through the patient, instead of using film, the images are
captured by a device called an image intensifier and converted into
light. The light is then captured by a camera and displayed on a video
monitor. Fluoroscopy allows the study of the function of the organ
(physiology) as well as the structure of the organ (anatomy).
2. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
 is a radiology technique that
uses magnetism, radio waves, and a computer to produce images of
body structures. The MRI scanner is a tube surrounded by a giant
circular magnet. The patient is placed on a moveable bed that is
inserted into the magnet. The magnet creates a strong magnetic field
that aligns the protons of hydrogen atoms, which are then exposed to
a beam of radio waves. This spins the various protons of the body and
produces a faint signal that is detected by the receiver portion of the
MRI scanner. The received information is processed by a computer,
and an image is then produced.
3. 
Tomography
 is the process of producing a tomogram, a two-
dimensional image of a slice or section, through a three-dimensional
object. Tomography achieves this result by simply moving an x-ray
source in one direction as the x-ray film is moved in the opposite
direction. The tomogram is the picture, tomograph is the apparatus,
and tomography is the process.
4. 
Biometry
 is the application of a statistical method to a biologic fact.
For example, the application of this science in radiology has resulted
in analysis of data, for example, of the effectiveness of radiation used
in the treatment of brain tumors—science applied to biology.
Planes
Terminology referring to planes of the body and the positioning of the
body is often used in the Radiology section. A 
position
 is how the
patient is placed during the x-ray examination (such as lying down or
standing up), and a 
projection
 is the path of the x-ray beam. An
example of a projection is anteroposterior, which denotes that the x-
ray beam enters the patient’s body at the front (anterior) and exits
from the back (posterior). An example of a position is 
prone,
 which
means the patient is lying on his or her anterior (front), but the
entrance and exit of the x-ray beam are not specified. Familiarity with
this terminology will aid you as you review the Radiology section and
begin to choose the correct codes for physician services. 
Fig. 24-1
illustrates the major planes and the surfaces of the body that can be
accessed by positioning the body.
 
From the Trenches
“We have a very strong camaraderie. Through networking, when coders
have problems with their notes or some questions they may have in coding,
they can always call someone they have networked with to get an answer.”
 
FIGURE 24–1
Planes of the body and terms of location and position of
the body.
PATRICIA
Fig. 24-2
 shows proximal and distal body references. 
Proximal
 and
distal
 are directional body references that mean closest to (proximal)
or farthest from (distal) the trunk of the body. These terms are
relative, meaning they are used to describe the position of the part as
compared with another part. Therefore, the term “proximal” describes
a part as being closer to the body trunk than another part, and the
term “distal” describes a part as being farther away from the body
than another part. The knee would be described as being proximal to
the ankle, and it would also be described as being distal to the thigh or
hip. 
Fig. 24-3
 illustrates the 
anteroposterior (AP)
 (front to back)
position, in which the patient has his or her front (anterior) closest to
the x-ray machine, and the x-ray travels through the patient from the
front to the back. In 
Fig. 24-4
, the 
posteroanterior (PA)
 position, the
patient has his or her back (posterior) located closest to the machine,
and the beam travels through the patient from back to front.
 
FIGURE 24–2
Proximal and distal.
 
FIGURE 24–3
Anteroposterior (AP) projection.
 
FIGURE 24–4
Posteroanterior (PA) projection.
Lateral
 positions are side positions. When the patient’s right side is
closest to the film, it is called 
right lateral.
 When the patient’s left side
is closest to the film, it is called 
left lateral.
 For 
example, 
Fig. 24-5
shows a left lateral position, and 
Fig. 24-6
 shows a right lateral
position. The use of these various positions allows the physician to
view the body from a variety of angles. 
Fig. 24-7
, 
A and B
 shows
posteroanterior and lateral positions used to view a patient’s lung
with emphysema.
 
FIGURE 24–5
Left lateral projection.
 
FIGURE 24–6
Right lateral projection.
 
 
FIGURE 24–7
Posteroanterior and lateral radiographs of the thorax in
a patient with emphysema.
Dorsal
 (more commonly refers to the “back” but may be stated to
mean “supine”) means lying on the back; 
ventral
 (more commonly
refers to the “anterior” but may be stated as “prone”) means lying on
the stomach; and 
lateral
 means lying on the side.
Decubitus
 positions are recumbent (lying) positions; the x-ray beam
is placed horizontally. Ventral decubitus (prone) is the act of lying on
the stomach (
Fig. 24-8
, 
A
), and dorsal decubitus (supine) is the act of
lying on the back (
Fig. 24-8
, 
B
). The term “decubitus,” 
generally
shortened to “decub,” has a special meaning in radiology. The simple
act of lying on one’s back would be referred to as lying supine, but if a
horizontal x-ray beam is used, the position becomes decubitus. The
type of decubitus is determined by the body surface the patient is
lying on.
 
FIGURE 24–8
Radiographic positions. 
A,
 Prone (ventral decubitus). 
B,
Supine (dorsal decubitus). 
C,
 Right lateral recumbent. 
D,
 Left lateral
recumbent. 
E,
 Ventral decubitus. 
F,
 Left lateral decubitus. 
G,
 Dorsal
decubitus. 
H,
 Left anterior oblique (LAO). 
I,
 Right anterior oblique
(RAO). 
J,
 Left posterior oblique (LPO). 
K,
 Right posterior oblique
(RPO).
Recumbent
 means lying down. Thus, right lateral recumbent means
the patient is lying on the right side (
Fig. 24-8
, 
C
), and left lateral
recumbent means the patient is lying on the left side (
Fig. 24-8
, 
D
). In
the ventral decubitus position, the patient is positioned prone and the
x-ray beam comes into the patient from the right side and exits on the
left (
Fig. 24-8
, 
E
).
In the left lateral decubitus position, the patient is lying on the left
side with the beam coming from the front and passing through to the
back (anteroposterior) (
Fig. 24-8
, 
F
).
When the patient is positioned on his or her back (dorsal decubitus)
and the x-ray beam comes into the left side of the patient, the
positioning is dorsal decubitus, but the view obtained is a right lateral
(because the right side is closest to the film) (
Fig. 24-8
, 
G
).
Oblique
 views refer to those obtained while the body is rotated so
it is not in a full anteroposterior or posteroanterior position but
somewhat diagonal. Oblique views are termed according to the body
surface on which the patient is lying. The left anterior oblique (LAO)
position is depicted in 
Fig. 24-8
, 
H
 with the patient’s left side rotated
forward toward the table. The patient is lying on the left anterior
aspect of his or her body. The right anterior oblique (RAO) position
has the patient on his or her right side rotated forward toward the
table, as in 
Fig. 24-8
, 
I.
Two more oblique views are left posterior oblique and right
posterior oblique. In the left posterior oblique (LPO) view, the patient
is rotated so that the left posterior aspect of his or her body is against
the table, as in 
Fig. 24-8
, 
J.
 The right posterior oblique (RPO) view has
the patient with the right side rotated back, as in 
Fig. 24-8
, 
K.
The last two terms that describe projections are tangential and axial.
Tangential
 is the position that allows the beam to skim the body part,
which produces a profile of the structure of the body (
Fig. 24-9
, 
A
).
Fig. 24-9
, 
B
 illustrates the 
axial
 projection, which is any projection that
allows the beam to pass through the body part lengthwise.
EXERCISE 24-2
Planes
Fill in the blanks with the correct words:
1 
What is the word that indicates how the patient is placed during the
x-ray examination? _______________________________
 
 
FIGURE 24–9
Radiographic projections. 
A,
 Tangential projection. 
B,
Axial projection.
2 
What is the term that indicates the path the x-ray beam travels?
_________________________________________________
What do the following abbreviations mean?
3 
AP
________________________________________________________________________________________________
4 
PA
________________________________________________________________________________________________
5 
RAO
______________________________________________________________________________________________
6 
LPO
______________________________________________________________________________________________
7 
What term indicates that a patient is lying supine, or on his or her
back? ___________________________________________
8 
What term indicates that a patient is lying prone, or on his or her
stomach? __________________________________________
9 
What term indicates that a patient is lying on his or her right side?
_______________________________________________
10 
What is the term that indicates when a patient is on his or her back
and the x-ray beam comes into the right side of the patient?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Guidelines
As with all Guidelines, the Radiology Guidelines should be read
carefully before radiologic procedures or services are reported. The
Guidelines contain the unique instructions used within the section
and the indications for multiple procedures, separate procedures,
unlisted radiology procedure codes, and applicable modifiers.
Guidelines that are used more commonly in this section than in
others are those explaining the professional, technical, and global
components of a procedure. These components are as follows:
1. 
Professional:
 describes the services of the physician, including the
supervision of the taking of the x-ray film and the interpretation with
report of the x-ray films.
2. 
Technical:
 describes the services of the technologist, as well as the
use of the equipment, film, and other supplies.
3. 
Global:
 describes the combination of the professional and technical
components (1 and 2).
For example, if a patient undergoes a radiology procedure in a clinic
that owns its own equipment, employs its own technologist(s), and
also employs the radiologist who supervises, interprets, and reports
on the radiologic results, the global procedure is reported. But if the
radiologist is reading and interpreting films that were taken at
another facility, only the professional component would be reported
for physician services.
 
CODING SHOT
Third-party payment is generally 40% for the professional
component, 60% for the technical component, and 100% for the global
service.
When only the professional component of the service is provided,
modifier -26 is placed after the CPT code. Modifier -26 alerts the third-
party payer to the fact that only the professional component was
provided. If, for example, an independent radiology facility takes a
complete chest x-ray (71030) and sends the x-rays to an independent
radiologist who reads the x-rays and writes a report of the findings in
the x-rays, the coding for the independent radiologist would be the
professional component only:
71030-26
Complete chest x-ray, four views
There is no CPT modifier to indicate the technical component of
radiologic services. The modifier most commonly used is the HCPCS
Level II modifier -TC, which reports the technical component. When
submitting claims for radiologic services in which only the technical
component was provided, use a code followed by -TC. For example, if
you were the coder for the independent radiology facility that took the
chest x-ray (71030) but sent it elsewhere to be interpreted, you would
report the technical component only:
71030-TC
Complete chest x-ray, four views
 
CODING SHOT
-TC (Technical Component) and -26 (Professional Component) are
terms used by third-party payers. When contacting a payer regarding
payment of a service, first determine if there is a separate allowance
for the -TC and -26.
Supervision and interpretation
The other coding practice most commonly used in the Radiology
section is called 
component coding,
 which means that a code from the
Radiology section as well as a code from one of the other sections
must be reported to fully describe the procedure. For example,
interventional radiologists may inject contrast material; place stents,
catheters, or guidewires; or perform any number of procedures found
throughout the CPT manual. Many times, before radiology
procedures can be performed, a contrast material must be injected into
the patient to make certain organs or vessels stand out more clearly on
the radiographic image. When this contrast material is injected into
the patient by the radiologist, a CPT code from the Surgery section
must be used to indicate the injection procedure, and a HCPCS Level
II code is reported for the contrast substance, such as A4641.
 
CODING SHOT
Codes in the Radiology section describe only the radiology
procedures, not the injections or placement of other material
necessary to perform the procedure.
Suppose, for example, a voiding urethrocystography with contrast
medium enhancement is performed. In this procedure, a physician
injects a radioactive material into the bladder. An x-ray of the bladder
(cystography) is then obtained; the x-rays show filling, voiding, and
post-voiding. The injection portion of the procedure is reported with a
surgery code (51600: Injection procedure for cystography or voiding
urethrocystography); the cystography is reported with a radiology
code (74455: Urethrocystography, voiding, radiologic supervision and
interpretation).
As a new coder, you will need to pay special attention to the
information in parentheses below the codes in the Radiology section.
This parenthetic material gives you information about other
components of procedures and other codes to consider. Previous
editions of the CPT manual had combination codes that were used
when the physician did both components of some procedures. Using
the combination code replaced the use of one code from surgery and
one code from radiology; but many of these combination codes have
been deleted to allow the physicians to more specifically indicate the
services provided. There are many parenthetic phrases throughout the
Radiology section, and you will want to refer to them when coding
component procedures.
TOOLBOX 24-1
 
Doris is sent to the local Radiology Associates by her family practice
physician because she has had a chronic cough that has not
responded to any conservative treatment. The radiologist takes a 2-
view chest x-ray, interprets the results, and writes a report.
Questions
1. 
Would you add a modifier to the CPT code for the chest x-ray?
_____________
2. 
What is your reason for your answer to Question 1? _________
______________________________
3. 
What would the radiologist send to the family practice physician
regarding Doris?_____________________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Odds and ends
Many of the code descriptions state “radiologic supervision and
interpretation” and alert you to component coding, letting you know
that -26 or -TC may be appropriate. Always read the parenthetic
information that follows these component codes.
Some codes are divided based on the extent of the radiologic
examination, such as procedures that specify “with KUB” (kidney,
ureter, and bladder). You must read the radiologist’s report or the
details in the medical record to understand the extent of the
procedure.
CMS RULES
The NCCI Version 18.1 bundles some x-rays into a main x-ray
procedure. For example, code 74241 (radiologic examination,
gastrointestinal tract, upper; with or without delayed images, with
KUB). According to the CCI edits, all the following codes are bundled
into 74241:
■
 
74000 – x-ray of the abdomen, single anteroposterior
■
 
74010 – x-ray of abdomen, anteroposterior and additional oblique
and cone views
■
 
74210 – x-ray exam, pharynx and/or cervical esophagus
■
 
74220 – x-ray exam of the esophagus
■
 
74240 – x-ray exam, gastrointestinal tract, upper, with or without
delayed images, without KUB
Some of these codes may be reported if a modifier (e.g., -59) is
added to indicate the service was separate and distinct from the main
service reported with 74241.
Codes are also often divided on the basis of whether contrast
material was or was not used. The phrase “with contrast” in the CPT
manual means contrast that was administered intravascularly, intra-
articularly, or intrathecally (into the subarachnoid space). If the
procedure indicates that contrast was administered orally or rectally,
the service is reported as “without contrast.”
 
CODING SHOT
Report the supply of contrast material with Medicine section code
99070, supplies, or a HCPCS code. The injection of the contrast
material is included in the “with contrast” radiology procedure code,
unless guidelines state that a surgical code should also be listed to
report the injection procedure. Avoid reporting 99070 if there is a
more definite HCPCS code available.
There are new guidelines issued by CMS that were originally titled
Medically Unbelievable Edits (MUEs). CMS changed the name to
Medically Unlikely Edits. This information is included in a software
system that allows Medicare to reduce the number of claims that
contain medically improbable information, such as a hysterectomy on
a male patient. There are approximately 3000 edits in the software,
and 60 of those directly relate to radiology service. One type of edit is
the maximum number of units that can be reported. If the MUE
indicated that the maximum number of units for a particular
radiology service was two for a particular service and you submitted
three units, the claim would be automatically edited (kicked out).
Unlike some edits, you cannot override the MUEs by appending a
modifier. 
Denied claims must be appealed with supporting
documentation that indicates the service was medically necessary,
was administered in a separate session, or was a repeat procedure by
the same physician.
Radiographic procedures are located in the CPT manual index
under the main term “X-ray,” with subterms for the anatomic part
(e.g., hand, spine).
EXERCISE 24-3
Guidelines
Fill in the blanks using the Radiology Guidelines of your CPT
manual:
1 
What procedure is one that is “performed independently of, and is
not immediately related to, other services”?
________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
What is the name of the Medicare edit software?
___________________________________________________________
3 
Using your CPT manual, list at least four of the subsections of the
Radiology section.
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diagnostic radiology
The most standard radiographic procedures are contained in the
Diagnostic Radiology subsection (70010-76499) of the Radiology
section. This subsection describes diagnostic imaging, including plain
x-ray films, the use of computed axial tomography (CAT or CT)
scanning, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA), and angiography. CT scanning uses an x-ray
beam that rotates around the patient, as illustrated in 
Fig. 24-10
. 
Fig.
24-11
 shows the detail that can be obtained with MRI and CT scans.
Special computer software is used with CT scanners to produce three-
dimensional images that enable the study of internal structures.
Tomography, CT scanning, and MRI may include the use of injectable
dyes (radiographic contrast) to aid in imaging, and the codes are
divided on the basis of whether or not contrast was used. For
example, under the subheading Spine and Pelvis (72020-72295), the
codes for CAT, MRI, and MRA are divided as follows:
72192
Computerized tomography, pelvis; without contrast material
72195
Magnetic resonance (e.g., proton) imaging, pelvis; without contrast material(s)
72198
Magnetic resonance angiography, pelvis, with or without contrast material(s)
 
FIGURE 24–10
A,
 Computed tomography scanner. 
B,
 Principles of
computed tomographic (CT) scanning. The x-ray tube produces a fan-
shaped beam that passes through a section (slice) of the patient. This
fan-shaped beam is received by a circular array of detectors at the
opposite side. These detectors receive x-rays along the path through
the patient’s body. The detector and x-ray source rotate around the
axis, producing exposures at 1-degree intervals of rotation.
 
FIGURE 24–11
Axial MRI frame. 
Arrows
 highlight the descending
aorta.
Note one of these codes is for CAT, one code for the MRI, and one
code for the MRA. The codes are divided by CAT, MRI, and MRA
throughout the Diagnostic Radiology subsection. So you must read
carefully to ensure that you report the correct type of imaging. 
Fig. 24-
12
 is an example of a magnetic resonance image of the brain.
 
From the Trenches
What are the benefits to working in medical coding?
“Feeling that you have not just helped doctors improve their bottom line, but
you also have helped patients not to have to worry about their bills.”
 
FIGURE 24–12
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan slice in the
axial, coronal, and sagittal planes from a patient with subcortical
aphasia. The lesion is an infarction involving the anterior caudate,
putamen, and anterior limb of the left internal capsule.
PATRICIA
In 
angiography,
 dyes are injected into the vessels to add contrast
that facilitates the visualization of vessels’ lumen size and condition.
The lumen is the cavity or channel within the vessel. Angiography is
performed to view blood vessels after injecting them with a radio-
opaque dye that outlines the vessels on x-ray. Angiography is used to
identify abnormalities inside the vessels. 
Fig. 24-13
 shows an
angiogram of the aortic arch and brachiocephalic vessels. The
radiologist studies the vessels using angiography to detect conditions
such as malformations, strokes, or myocardial infarctions.
 
FIGURE 24–13
Angiography of the aortic arch and brachiocephalic
vessels.
There are some combination codes in the angiography codes; so you
must carefully read the complete procedure descriptor and
parenthetical information to assure correct coding.
Codes in the Diagnostic Radiology subsection are divided according
to anatomic site, from the head down. Some of the codes indicate a
specific number of views, such as a minimum of three views or a
single view. Pay special attention to the description in each code and
understand clearly how many views are specified in the code.
 
CODING SHOT
If fewer than the total number of views specified in the code are
taken, modifier -52 would be used to indicate to the third-party payer
that less of the procedure was performed than is described by the
code, unless a code already exists for the smaller number of views.
Breast, mammography
Mammography
 (77063-77067) is the use of diagnostic radiology to
detect breast tumors or other abnormal breast conditions, such as
these codes used to report mammography services:
77065
Mammography; unilateral
77066
bilateral
77067
Screening mammography, bilateral (2-view film study of each breast)
Codes 77065 and 77066 report mammography performed to detect a
suspected tumor. For example, a patient who upon examination has
demonstrated an abnormality in a breast would appropriately have
the service reported with 77065. If, however, a patient has presented
for the usual screening mammography, report the service with 77067.
Note that the description for the usual screening mammography
indicates “bilateral,” because screening mammography is performed
on both breasts.
When new codes are published, their submission requires special
attention. Under Radiology Guidelines, if a service is rarely provided,
unusual, variable, or new, when submitting for reimbursement of the
service a special report may be necessary. The report would include
the complexity of symptoms, final diagnosis, pertinent physical
findings, diagnostic/therapeutic procedures, concurrent problems,
and follow-up care.
EXERCISE 24-4
Diagnostic Radiology and Breast
Mammography
Code the radiology portion of the procedures unless otherwise
directed:
1 
What is the code for a diagnostic mammography, bilateral?
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
What is the code for an unlisted diagnostic radiologic procedure?
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
What is the code for the supervision and interpretation of an
aortography, thoracic, by serialography?
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Diagnostic ultrasound
Another subsection in Radiology is Diagnostic Ultrasound (76506-
76999). 
Diagnostic ultrasound
 is the use of high-frequency sound
waves to image anatomic structures and to detect the cause of illness
and disease. It is used by the physician in the diagnostic process.
Ultrasound moves at different speeds through tissue, depending on
the density of the tissue. Forms and outlines of organs can be
identified by ultrasound as the sound waves move through or bounce
back (echo) from the tissues.
 
QUICK CHECK 24-1
1. 
According to the information in Diagnostic Ultrasound, Pelvis
codes 76805 and ____________________ include determination of
the number of fetuses.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 24-5
Diagnostic Ultrasound
In the CPT manual, Diagnostic Ultrasound is usually divided into
subheadings.
Locate and list the subheadings:
1
____________________________________________________________________________________________
2
____________________________________________________________________________________________
3
____________________________________________________________________________________________
4
____________________________________________________________________________________________
5
____________________________________________________________________________________________
6
____________________________________________________________________________________________
7
____________________________________________________________________________________________
8
____________________________________________________________________________________________
9
____________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
There are many uses for ultrasound in medicine, such as showing a
gallstone (
Fig. 24-14
) or showing twins (
Fig. 24-15
). You may think
that these ultrasound procedures do not produce a picture clear
enough to be of use to the physician in the diagnostic process, but a
professional trained in the interpretation of ultrasound images is able
to read them clearly.
 
FIGURE 24–14
Ultrasound showing a gallstone.
FIGURE 24–15
Ultrasound showing twins in separate sacs.
Codes for ultrasound procedures are found in three locations:
■
 
Radiology section, Diagnostic Ultrasound subsection, 76506-76999,
is usually divided on the basis of the anatomic location of the
procedure (chest, pelvis)
■
 
Medicine section, Non-Invasive Vascular Diagnostic Studies
subsection, 93880-93998, divided on the basis of the anatomic
location of the procedure (cerebrovascular, extremity)
■
 
Medicine section, Echocardiography (ultrasound of the heart and
great arteries), 93303-93355
An 
interventional radiologist
 is a physician who is skilled in both
the surgical procedure and the radiology portion of an interventional
radiologic service. The interventional radiologist is a board-certified
physician who specializes in minimally invasive treatments (entry
into the body for diagnostic purposes) performed using image
guidance. These procedures have less risk, pain, and recovery time
compared with open surgery. For example, an interventional
radiologist who performed a liver biopsy using CT guidance to locate
the lesion would report the services with a surgery code (47000) and a
radiology code (77012-26). The interventional radiologist provided the
surgical portion of the service, reported with a surgery code, and
provided the professional portion of the CT guidance service,
reported with a code from the Radiology section with modifier -26.
Most of the services in the Diagnostic Ultrasound subsection are
located in the index of the CPT manual under the main term
“Ultrasound.” These terms are subdivided anatomically and by
procedure (e.g., guidance or drainage).
The ultrasound sound waves are sent through body tissues with a
device called a 
transducer.
 The transducer is placed directly on the
skin to which a gel has been applied. The sound waves that are sent
by the transducer through the body are then reflected by internal
structures that return an echo to the transducer. The echoes are then
transmitted electronically to the viewing monitor. The echo images are
recorded on film or video tape. The technical term for ultrasound
testing and recording is sonography. Ultrasound testing is painless
and involves no radiation and produces no harmful side effects.
Ultrasound examinations can be utilized in various areas of the
body for a multitude of purposes. These purposes can include
examination of the chest, abdomen, and blood vessels (such as to
detect blood clots in veins). Ultrasound can obtain detailed images of
the size and function of the heart and detect abnormalities of the
valves (such as mitral valve prolapse and aortic stenosis) and
endocarditis (infection of the heart). Ultrasound is commonly used to
guide fluid withdrawal (aspiration) from the chest, lung, or heart.
Other uses of ultrasound include gallstone detection and viewing of
the ureter, liver, spleen, pancreas, and aorta within the abdomen.
Ultrasound can detect fluid, cysts, tumors, or abscesses in the
abdomen or liver, aortic aneurysms, evaluate the structure of the
thyroid gland in the neck, arteriosclerosis in the legs, and evaluate the
size, gender, movement, and position of the growing baby during
pregnancy.
Modes and scans
There are four different types of ultrasound listed in the CPT manual:
A-mode, M-mode, B-scan, and real-time scan.
A-mode:
 one-dimensional display reflecting the time it takes the
sound wave to reach a structure and reflect back. This process maps
the outline of the structure. “A” is for amplitude of sound return
(echo).
M-mode:
 one-dimensional display of the movement of structures.
“M” stands for motion.
B-scan:
 two-dimensional display of the movement of tissues and
organs. “B” stands for brightness. The sound waves bounce off
tissue or organs and are projected onto a black and white television
screen. The strong signals display as black and the weaker signals
display as lighter shades of gray. B-scan is also called gray-scale
ultrasound.
Real-time scan:
 two-dimensional display of both the structure and the
motion of tissues and organs that indicates the size, shape, and
movement of the tissue or organ.
Codes are often divided on the basis of the scan or mode that was
used and the medical record will indicate the scan or mode used.
Several codes within the subsection include the use of Doppler
ultrasound. 
Doppler ultrasound
 is the use of sound that can be
transmitted only through solids or liquids and is a specific version of
ultrasonography, or ultrasound. Doppler ultrasound is named for an
Austrian physicist, Johann Doppler, who discovered a relationship
between sound and light waves—a relationship upon which
ultrasound technology was built. Doppler ultrasound is used to
measure moving objects and as such is ideal for measuring bloodflow.
Codes often state “with or without Doppler.” Doppler ultrasound can
be standard black and white or color. Color Doppler translates the
standard black and white into colored images. Just imagine how much
easier it is to see a leak in a vessel when the vessel is yellow and the
blood is red. The code descriptions will specifically state “color-flow
Doppler.”
There is some component coding necessary, but it occurs mostly
under the subheading of Ultrasonic Guidance Procedures (76930-
76999). The parenthetic information will refer you to the surgical
procedure code. For example, 76945 is for the radiologic supervision
and interpretation of ultrasonic guidance for chorionic villus
sampling, which is an aspiration of cells for analysis to determine any
cell abnormalities. The physician guides the insertion of a needle to
withdraw the sample. If the physician performed both the radiologic
portion of the procedure and the surgical procedure, you would
report 59015 from the Surgery section and 76945 from the Radiology
section. The radiology service reported with 76945 is not bundled into
the surgical service (59015) and would be separately reimbursed.
Modifier -26 would be reported with 76945, unless the radiologist
owned the equipment.
EXERCISE 24-6
Modes and Scans
Assign codes using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals for the
following:
1 
An ultrasound of the spinal canal
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
An ultrasound of the chest and mediastinum, real time
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
A complete abdominal ultrasound in real time with image
documentation
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
A repeat uterine ultrasound in real time with image documentation
of a 32-week pregnant female with twins
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ (pregnancy)
5 
A fetal profile, biophysical, with nonstress testing in a mother with
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ (pregnancy)
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Radiation oncology
The Radiation Oncology subsection (77261-77799) of the Radiology
section reports both professional and technical treatments utilizing
radiation to destroy tumors, and special attention must be given to
reporting the components. The subsection is divided on the basis of
treatment. Read all of the definitions carefully to make certain you
know what is bundled into the code. Many third-party payers have
developed strict guidelines determining the number of times some
procedures are allowed within each treatment course. You should
work closely with third-party payers to understand their preferred
reporting.
From the Trenches
 
 
“There are so many opportunities and not enough skilled coders to fill the
positions for physician’s offices, clinics, hospitals, as health care consultants,
and also in colleges to teach coding at a college level.”
PATRICIA
The codes within this subheading include codes for the initial
consultation through management of the patient during the course of
treatment. When the initial consultation occurs, the code for the
service would be an E/M code. For example, the patient might be an
inpatient when the therapeutic radiologist first sees the patient for
evaluation of treatment options and before a decision for treatment is
made. You would report this consultation service with an Inpatient
Consultation code from the E/M section.
Clinical treatment planning
Clinical Treatment Planning (77261-77263) reflects professional
services by the physician. It includes interpretation of special testing,
tumor localization, treatment volume determination, treatment
time/dosage determination, choice of treatment modality (method),
determination of number and size of treatment ports, selection of
appropriate treatment devices, and any other procedures necessary to
adequately develop a course of treatment. A treatment plan is
established for all patients requiring radiation therapy.
There are three types of clinical treatment plans: simple,
intermediate, and complex.
Simple
 planning requires that there be a single treatment area that is
encompassed by a single port or by simple parallel opposed ports
with simple or no blocking.
Intermediate
 planning requires that there be three or more
converging ports, two separate treatment areas, multiple blocks, or
special time/dose constraints.
Complex
 planning requires that there be highly complex blocking,
custom shielding blocks, tangential ports, special wedges or
compensators, three or more separate treatment areas, rotational or
special beam consideration, or a combination of therapeutic
modalities.
Simulation
Simulation (77280-77299) is the service of determining treatment areas
and the placement of the ports for radiation treatment but does not
include the administration of the radiation. A simulation can be
performed on a simulator designated for use only in simulations in a
radiation therapy treatment unit, or on a diagnostic x-ray machine.
Codes are divided into four levels of service:
Simple
 simulation of a single treatment area, with either a single port
or parallel opposed ports and simple or no blocking
Intermediate
 simulation of three or more converging ports, with two
separate treatment areas and multiple blocks
Complex
 simulation of tangential ports, with three or more treatment
areas, rotation or arc therapy, complex blocking, custom shielding
blocks, brachytherapy source verification, hyperthermia probe
verification, and any use of contrast material
Three-dimensional
 (3D) computer-generated reconstruction of tumor
volume and surrounding critical normal tissue structures based on
direct CT scan and/or MRI data in preparation for non-coplanar or
coplanar therapy. This is a simulation that utilizes documented
three-dimensional beam’s-eye view volume dose displays of
multiple or moving beams. Documentation of three-dimensional
volume reconstruction and dose distribution is required.
After the initial simulation and treatment plans have been
established for a patient, if any change is made in the field of
treatment, a new simulation billing is required. When coding for a
treatment period, you will have codes for planning, simulation, the
isodose plan, devices, treatment management (the number of
treatments determines the number of times billed), and the radiation
delivery.
The codes in Clinical Treatment Planning are located in the index of
the CPT manual under the main term “Radiation Therapy.” Codes can
also be located under the main term of the specific service, such as
“Field Set-up.”
EXERCISE 24-7
Clinical Treatment Planning
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
Complex therapeutic radiology simulation-aided field setting
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Therapeutic radiology treatment planning; simple
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Medical radiation physics, dosimetry,
treatment devices, and special services
Medical Radiation Physics, Dosimetry, Treatment Devices, and
Special Services (77300-77370, 77399) reports the decision making of
the physician as to the type of treatment (modality), dose, and
development of treatment devices. It is common to have several
dosimetry or device changes during a treatment course. 
Dosimetry
 is
the calculation of the radiation dose and placement.
Codes in this subheading are divided mostly on the basis of the
level of treatment (simple, intermediate, complex). The codes are
located in the index of the CPT manual under the main term
“Radiation Therapy” and the subterm of the specific service, such as
Dose Plan or Treatment Delivery.
EXERCISE 24-8
Medical Radiation Physics, Dosimetry,
Treatment Devices, and Special Services
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Design and construction of a bite block, intermediate
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Calculation of an isodose plan for brachytherapy, single plane, two
sources, simple
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Teletherapy, isodose plan, to one area, simple, for cancer of the
prostate, primary malignant
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Radiation treatment delivery
Stereotactic Radiation Treatment Delivery (77371-77373) and
Radiation Treatment Delivery (77401-77425) reflect 
technical
components
 only. These codes report the actual delivery of the
radiation. Radiation treatment is delivered in units called
megaelectron volts (MeV). A megaelectron volt is a unit of energy.
The radiation energy 
delivered
 by the machine is measured in
megaelectron volts; the energy that is 
deposited
 in the patient’s tissue
is measured in Gray (one Gray = 100 rads; 1 centigray [cGy] = 1 rad). A
rad is a radiation-absorbed dose. The therapy dose in a cancer
treatment would typically be in the thousands of rads.
To report Radiation Treatment Delivery services, you need to know
the amount of radiation delivered (6-10 MeV, 11-19 MeV) and the
number of the following:
■
 
Areas
 treated (single, two, three or more)
■
 
Ports
 involved (single, three or more, tangential)
■
 
Blocks
 used (none, multiple, custom)
EXERCISE 24-9
Radiation Treatment Delivery
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
The patient receives radiation treatment delivery:
1 
To a single area at 4 MeV, simple
CPT Code: ________________
2 
With superficial voltage only
CPT Code: ________________
3 
To four separate areas with a rotational beam at 4 MeV, complex
CPT Code: ________________
4 
For two separate areas, using three or more ports with multiple
blocks at 5 MeV, intermediate
CPT Code: ________________
5 
For three or more separate areas using custom blocks, wedges,
rotation beams, up to 5 MeV (complex) for bone metastasis of the
thoracic and lumbar spine (unknown primary)
CPT Code: ________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Intensity-modulated radiation treatment
 (IMRT) is reported with
77385-77387. IMRT is an advanced type of radiation therapy to treat
cancer and non-cancerous tumors. The treatment of delivery
manipulates beams that conform to the shape of the tumor. IMRT
delivery reduces the exposure to healthy tissue and also limits the side
effects of treatment.
Radiation treatment management
Radiation Treatment Management codes (77427-77499) report the
professional component
 of radiation treatment management. The
codes report management of radiation therapy. The notes under the
heading Radiation Treatment Management state that clinical
management is based on five fractions or treatment sessions
regardless of the time interval separating the delivery of treatment.
This means that code 77427 may be reported if the patient receives at
least five treatments, no matter the length of time between the
treatments. Multiple fractions furnished on the same day may be
reported separately as long as there was a break between fractions
and the fractions represent the characteristics of those typically
delivered may still be reported.
If the patient receives five treatments and then receives an
additional one or two fractions, you do not report the additional
fractions. Only if three or more fractions beyond the original five are
delivered would you report 77427 to indicate the additional treatment
management.
Bundled into the Radiation Treatment Management codes are the
following physician services:
■
 
Review of port films
■
 
Review of dosimetry, dose delivery, and treatment parameters
■
 
Review of patient treatment setup
■
 
Examination of the patient for medical evaluation and management
(e.g., assessment of the patient’s response to treatment, coordination
of care and treatment, review of imaging and/or lab test results)
 
CODING SHOT
Services related to and covered under Radiation Treatment
Management are based on the third-party payer.
The following can be reported in addition to 77427 (treatment
management) because none of the following are bundled into the
treatment management:
■
 
77417 Port image(s), two per week per treatment course
■
 
77300 Basic plan calculation at the onset of treatment
■
 
77263 Complex planning reported at the beginning of treatment
■
 
E/M code: Usually on the first day of treatment as either an office
visit or a consultation service
 
CODING SHOT
Code 77427 is reported once per each unit of five fractions or
treatment sessions. All five sessions/treatments must be completed to
report code 77427. The continuing medical physics consultation code
77336 is reported by the physicist once per every fifth fraction. This is
a facility/technical service code and is not reported by the radiation
oncologist.
It would be inappropriate to report these items individually. For
example, the physician sees the patient in the office to evaluate the
patient’s response to treatment. You might think you should use an
E/M code to report the office visit, but that would be incorrect because
the management codes already include the office visit service.
Proton beam treatment delivery
The delivery of radiation treatment (77520-77525) using a proton beam
utilizes particles that are positively charged with electricity. The use of
the proton beam is an alternative delivery method for radiation in
which proton (electromagnetic) radiation would be used. The codes in
the subheading are divided according to whether the delivery was
simple, intermediate, or complex.
Hyperthermia
Hyperthermia (77600-77615) is an increase in body temperature and is
used as an adjunct to radiation therapy or chemotherapy for the
treatment of cancer. The heat source can be ultrasound, microwave, or
another means of increasing the temperature in an area. When the
temperature of an area is increased, metabolism increases, which
boosts the ability of the body to eradicate the cancer cells. The location
of the heat source can be external (to a depth of greater or less than 4
cm), interstitial (within the tissues), or intracavitary (inside the body).
External treatment would be the application to the skin of a heat
source. Interstitial treatment is the insertion of a probe that delivers
heat directly to the treatment area. Codes 77600-77615 report external
or interstitial treatment delivery.
Intracavitary hyperthermia treatment delivery requires the insertion
of a heat-producing probe into a body orifice, such as the rectum or
vagina. Code 77620 reports intracavitary treatment and is the only
code listed under the heading Clinical Intracavitary Hyperthermia.
 
QUICK CHECK 24-2
1. 
Hyperthermia is used as an independent treatment modality.
True or False?
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 24-10
Clinical Treatment Management
Using the CPT manual, code the following management services:
1 
Five radiation treatments
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Unlisted procedure code for therapeutic radiation clinical treatment
management (Submission of this unlisted procedure code would
necessitate a special report and assumes that no Category III code
exists for the procedure.)
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Clinical brachytherapy
Clinical 
brachytherapy
 (77750-77799) is the placement of radioactive
material directly into or surrounding the site of the tumor as
discussed earlier in this text. Placement may be intracavitary or
interstitial, and material may be placed permanently or temporarily.
The terms “source” and “ribbon” are used in the Clinical
Brachytherapy codes. A 
source
 is a container holding a radioactive
element that can be inserted directly into the body where it delivers
the radiation dose over time. Sources come in various forms, such as
seeds or capsules, and are placed in a cavity (intracavitary) or
permanently placed within the tissue (interstitial). 
Fig. 24-16
 illustrates
the results of a single permanent seed implanted into the 
cranial
posterior fossa of a patient with a meningioma. A ribbon is another
source and ribbons are seeds embedded on a tape. The ribbon is cut to
the desired length to control the amount of radiation the patient
receives. Ribbons are inserted temporarily into the tissue.
 
 
 
FIGURE 24–16
A,
 MR image scan of 80-year-old man with large
petroclival meningioma previously treated with radiosurgery 6 years
earlier. 
B,
 Results 3 months after placement of single permanent I-125
seed. 
C,
 Results 9 months after placement of single seed.
Codes are divided on the basis of the number of sources or ribbons
used in an application:
■
 
Simple
1-4
■
 
Intermediate
5-10
■
 
Complex
11 or more
The Clinical Brachytherapy codes include the physician’s work
related to the patient’s admission to the hospital as well as the daily
hospital visits.
EXERCISE 24-11
Clinical Brachytherapy
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A simple application of a radioactive source, intracavitary
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
A complex application of a radioactive source, interstitial
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Surface application of a radiation source for ovarian cancer, primary
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Nuclear medicine
Nuclear medicine (78012-79999) reports placement of radionuclides
within the body and the monitoring of emissions from the radioactive
elements. Nuclear medicine is used not only for diagnostic studies but
also for therapeutic treatment, such as treatment of thyroid conditions.
Stress tests
 are an example of nuclear medicine techniques.
Radioactive material may be used during stress tests to monitor
coronary artery bloodflow. Radioactive material (called a 
tracer)
adheres to red blood cells (such as thallium or technetium sestamibi
[Cardiolite]). The radioactive materials on the red blood cells allow an
image of the heart to be seen and indicate areas where blood is
flowing. The radioactive materials are injected 1 minute before the
end of a stress test and then again 24 hours later for a comparison
study. If the bloodflow is decreased or absent, the image will show a
blank area. If the coronary arteries are clear and allow blood to flow to
the heart muscle, the image will show blood dispersement to all areas.
If the arteries are partially blocked, the flow may be decreased but
would be adequate during rest. During exercise, however, the
necessary amount of oxygenated blood may not be adequate to keep
the heart functioning properly, and that is when chest pain may occur.
During a stress test, if radionuclide dispersement is absent during
exercise (showing inadequate blood supply to the area during peak
demand) but is present during resting periods (showing adequate
flow at rest), this is called 
reversible ischemia,
 meaning that heart
muscle death has not occurred. With intervention, arteries may be
opened or bypassed to increase the supply of blood to the muscle
before heart muscle death does occur. If the radionuclide is absent
during rest and exercise, the ischemia is considered 
irreversible,
meaning that heart muscle death has already occurred. A stress test is
one of the many uses of nuclear medicine for diagnostic purposes. As
you code, you will become familiar with these various diagnostic tests
and how they are reported.
 
CODING SHOT
None of the codes in the subsection includes the
radiopharmaceutical(s) used for diagnosis or therapy services. When
radiopharmaceutical(s) are supplied the entity providing the
materials would submit HCPCS Level II codes or CPT 99070,
according to payer policy. Therapeutic services would be reported
separately, reported with codes 79005 (oral), 79101 (intravenous),
79440 (intra-articular) or 79445 (intra-arterial). The oral and
intravenous administration codes include the administration service.
For intra-arterial, intra-cavity, and intra-articular administration, also
report the appropriate injection/procedure codes in addition to the
imaging guidance and radiological supervision/interpretation, when
appropriate.
Two other subheadings within the Nuclear Medicine subsection are
Diagnostic (78012-78999) and Therapeutic (79005-79999). The
subheading Diagnostic is further divided into category codes based on
system, such as the endocrine system and the cardiovascular system.
EXERCISE 24-12
Nuclear Medicine
Which category in the Nuclear Medicine subsection would you
reference to locate codes for the following?
1 
Liver
____________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
Thyroid
__________________________________________________________________________________________
3 
Spleen
___________________________________________________________________________________________
4 
Bone
____________________________________________________________________________________________
5 
Brain
____________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 24, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What is the definition of the suffix -
graphy
?
_______________________________________________________________
2 There are times when a code from the Radiology section as well as a
code from another section are reported. What is this practice called?
_____________________________________________________________________________________
3 What modifier is used when only the professional component of the
service is provided? __________
4 In angiography, dyes are injected into the vessels. What does this
facilitate? _____________________________________
5 What is the first subsection in the Radiology section of the CPT
manual? _______________________________________
6 What modifier would be used when fewer than the total number of
views specified in the code are taken? __________
Chapter 24, part I, theory
Without the use of the CPT manual, complete the following:
1 What is a branch of medicine that uses radiant energy to diagnose
and treat patients?
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
2 The CPT manual divides the Radiology section into subsections of
Radiologic Guidance, Breast Mammography, Bone/Joint Studies,
Diagnostic Radiology, Diagnostic _________________________,
Radiation _________________________ ______________, and Nuclear
Medicine.
3 What type of procedure is “performed independently of, and is not
immediately related to, other services”?
________________________________________________________________________________________
(two words)
4 One Gray equals how many rads?
________________________________________________________________
(use numeral)
5 The modifier used to indicate the Professional Component is
_________________________________ 
(Make sure to include a dash in
front of your modifier answer. -XX)
.
6 The two words that mean supervising the taking of the x-rays and
reading/reporting the results of the films are supervision and
_____________________________________________________________________________________________.
7 The name for the use of high-frequency sound waves in an imaging
process that is used to diagnose patient illness is diagnostic
________________________________________________________________________________________.
8 The Radiation Oncology section of the CPT manual is divided into
subsections based on the ________________________ of service
provided to the patient.
9 The scientific study of energy is
_______________________________________________________________________.
10 The scientific calculation of the radiation emitted from various
radioactive sources is
_________________________________________________________________________________________________.
11 Radiation treatment delivery codes are based on the treatment area
involved and further divided based on levels of what?
_________________________________________________________________________________________________.
12 MeV stands for
____________________________________________________________________________________.
13 Radiation Treatment Management is reported in units of
______________ (use numeral) fractions.
14 Nuclear Medicine uses these to image organs for diagnosis and
treatment: ______________________________________
Using
 
Figure 24-17
 
on the next page, identify the planes of the body:
FIGURE 24–17
Identify the planes of the body.
15
____________________________________________________________________________________________
plane
16
___________________________________________________________________________________
(horizontal) plane
17
____________________________________________________________________________________________
plane
Chapter 24, part II, practical
The coding exercise that follows uses codes from a variety of CPT sections.
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following (Separate
multiple codes with a comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX,
XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers.
XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x
X):
18 An established patient is seen in the physician’s office with the
chief complaint of a persistent cough. Otherwise, the patient claims to
be in good health. The physician collects a history, including the chief
complaint and the history of the present illness. The physical
examination performed focuses on the respiratory tract. The decision
making is straightforward because the physician wants to evaluate the
patient for a possible case of bronchitis.
CPT Code: 
____________________
The patient is sent to the clinic’s radiology
department for a two-view chest x-ray study,
frontal and lateral.
CPT Code: 
____________________
The radiologist sends the x-ray results to the
physician, who reviews them and decides to
order a consultation with a pulmonologist
from another clinic. The patient sees the other
clinic’s pulmonologist, who performs a
comprehensive history and a comprehensive
examination with moderate complexity.
CPT Code: 
____________________
The pulmonologist orders a CT of the chest,
without contrast, and the radiologist
supervises and interprets the results.
CPT Code: 
____________________
A bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung
biopsy is performed in the ambulatory
surgery center.
CPT Code: 
____________________
19 A new patient is seen in the office for unilateral ear pain. In the
expanded problem focused history and the physical examination, the
physician focuses his attention on the head, ears, nose, and throat. The
physician’s provisional diagnoses include otalgia and possible ear
infections. The decision making is straightforward for the physician.
CPT Code: 
____________________
The patient is sent to the clinic’s radiologist for
an x-ray of the ear.
CPT Code: 
____________________
The patient is then sent to the clinic’s ear
specialist, who inserts a ventilation tube
(tympanostomy) using local anesthesia.
CPT Code: 
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: 
________________
20 A new patient is seen in the office for a variety of complaints, but in
particular a swelling and heaviness of his right leg. The physician
documents the patient’s complaints, collects a comprehensive history
of the present illness, performs a comprehensive review of systems,
and inquires about the patient’s past, family, and social history. A
complete multisystem physical examination is performed. The
physician’s working diagnosis is edema of the lower extremity, cause
to be determined. Given the nature of the problem, the physician
considers the decision-making process to be highly complex.
CPT Code: 
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: 
________________
21A The patient is sent to radiology for a unilateral
lymphangiography of one extremity due to swelling of the arm. The
patient has a history of breast cancer.
CPT Code: 
____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: 
________________,
________________
21B Another physician performs the injection procedure for the
lymphangiography.
CPT Code: 
____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 25
Pathology/laboratory
 
“Coding is a diverse field, so there are a lot of opportunities in many
areas. . . . Find an area of interest and become an expert in it; make
yourself valuable.”
Keith Russell, CPC, COC
Senior Compliance Analyst
 
Baylor College of Medicine
 
Houston, Texas
CHAPTER TOPICS
Format
Organ or Disease-Oriented Panels
Drug Assay
Therapeutic Drug Assays
Evocative/Suppression Testing
Consultations (Clinical Pathology)
Urinalysis, Molecular Pathology, and Chemistry
Hematology and Coagulation
Immunology
Transfusion Medicine
Microbiology
Anatomic Pathology
Cytopathology and Cytogenic Studies
Surgical Pathology
Other Procedures
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Explain the format of the Pathology and Laboratory section.
2 
Understand the information in the Pathology and Laboratory
Guidelines.
3 
Demonstrate an understanding of Pathology and Laboratory
terminology.
4 
Differentiate amongst the Organ or Disease Oriented Panels codes.
5 
Recognize Drug Assay codes.
6 
Identify Therapeutic Drug Assays codes.
7 
Classify Evocative/Suppression Testing codes.
8 
Explain Consultations (Clinical Pathology) codes.
9 
Interpret Urinalysis, Molecular Pathology, and Chemistry codes.
10 
Evaluate Hematology and Coagulation codes.
11 
Describe Immunology codes.
12 
Discriminate amongst Transfusion Medicine codes.
13 
Interpret Microbiology codes.
14 
Evaluate Anatomic Pathology codes.
15 
Summarize Cytopathology and Cytogenic Studies codes.
16 
Explain Surgical Pathology codes.
17 
Choose Other Procedures codes.
18 
Demonstrate the ability to code Pathology and Laboratory services.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Format
The Pathology and Laboratory section of the CPT manual is formatted
according to type of test performed—automated multichannel, panels,
assays, and so forth. To familiarize yourself with the content of the
Pathology and Laboratory section, review the subsections in the CPT
manual. This will help you get a broad overview of the contents of
this important section as you prepare to learn the specifics.
Laboratories have built-in 
indicators
 that allow additional tests to
be performed without a written order from the physician. These
standards are set by the medical facility and imply that when a certain
test is positive, it is assumed that the physician would want further
information on the condition and specific additional tests performed.
For example, if a routine urinalysis is performed, a culture is
performed if the test is positive for bacteria. If a culture is performed
to identify the organism, a sensitivity test is performed if the bacteria
are of a certain type or count, as predetermined by the medical facility
to warrant the additional laboratory studies. You will code only after
the tests are performed, because an order for a laboratory test does not
ensure that the test will be performed. This standard ensures that all
laboratory tests performed are reported. Remember that what the
physician ordered may not be all the laboratory work performed,
depending on the facility’s policy concerning indicators.
The services in the Pathology and Laboratory section include the
laboratory 
tests
 only. The 
collection
 of the specimen is reported
separately from the analysis of the test. For example, if a technician in
a clinic laboratory withdraws blood by means of a venipuncture from
the arm, and the blood sample was then analyzed in the laboratory,
you would report 36415 for the venipuncture as shown in 
Fig. 25-1
 in
addition to a code to report the test performed on the blood in the
laboratory.
 
FIGURE 25–1
Venipuncture.
Most Pathology and Laboratory subsections contain notes.
Whenever notes are available, be sure to read them before assigning
codes from the subsection because specific information pertinent to
the codes is contained in these notes.
Organ or disease-oriented panels
The codes in the Organ or Disease-Oriented Panels subsection (80047-
80081) are grouped according to the usual laboratory work ordered by
a physician for the diagnosis of or screening for various diseases or
conditions. Groups of tests may be performed together using
automated equipment, depending on the situation or disease. For
example, during the first obstetric visit, a mother is commonly asked
to have baseline laboratory tests performed to ensure that appropriate
antepartum care is provided. CPT code 80055 describes an obstetric
panel that would typically be performed during the first obstetric
visit.
To assign a panel code, each test listed in the panel description must
be performed. Additional tests are reported separately. The
development of panels saves the facility from having to report each
test separately, and it is often more economical for the patient. You
cannot assign modifier -52 (reduced service) with a panel. For
example, if all of the tests in 
the obstetric panel were done except the
syphilis test, you could not report 80055 (Obstetrical Panel) with
modifier -52. You would instead list each of the tests separately.
 
CODING SHOT
Be careful when coding multiple panels on the same day for the same
patient. Sometimes several panels include some of the same tests. For
example, a hepatitis B surface antigen test is included in both the
obstetric panel and the acute hepatitis panel. It would be
inappropriate to report the same test twice.
The laboratory and pathology reports in the patient medical record
will describe the method by which the test was performed. There are
many different methods of performing the same test. For example, a
urinalysis can be automated or nonautomated and can include or
exclude microscopy. It is necessary to know these details if you are to
assign the correct urinalysis code. If the details you need are not in the
medical record, ask the laboratory staff or physician for further
clarification.
EXERCISE 25-1
Organ or Disease-Oriented Panels
Complete the following:
1 
Hepatic function panel code in a patient with hepatitis B serum
virus, chronic
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
How many laboratory tests must be included in a hepatic function
panel? ____________
3 
Does an obstetric panel include a rubella antibody test?
____________
4 
Is blood typing ABO included in an obstetric panel? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Drug assay
Laboratory Presumptive Drug Class Screening (80305-80307) is
performed to identify the presence or absence of a drug. Testing that
determines the presence or absence of a drug is 
qualitative
 (the drug
is either present or not present in the specimen).
 
From the Trenches
Why should a coder consider getting certified?
“Certification indicates a level of competence and many employers now
require applicants to be certified. Plus, salary surveys have shown that
certified coders command higher salaries than non-certified coders.”
KEITH
The screening of drug classes is divided by method, including
visual, instrument, and chemical. Codes 80305-80307 report drug
screening of any number of drug classes.
 
QUICK CHECK 25-1
1. 
What is the repeat clinical laboratory test modifier? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
TOOLBOX 25-1
 

Jason has been sent to the clinic to have a drug test, as are all
employees of the company for which he works. The company
requests all employees be screened for barbiturates and tricyclic
antidepressants.
Questions
1. 
Your clinic used a presumptive multiple drug classes
chromatograph method to test the two drug classes. How would
you report the service chromatographic determination of these two
drugs? _________________
2. 
If your clinic did not use chromatography but rather did a single
drug class method by instrumented test systems for each of the two
tests, how would you report the tests? _________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Therapeutic drug assays
Therapeutic drug assays (80150-80299) test for a specific drug and for
the amount of that drug. Many types of drugs are listed in this
subsection. If the drug is not listed, it is possible that quantitative
analysis may be listed under the methodology (e.g., immunoassay,
radioassay).
Therapeutic drug assays are performed to help the physician
monitor the level of medication in the patient’s system or to monitor
the patient’s compliance. For example, levels may be measured to
make certain the patient is getting the correct level of antibiotics.
Blood specimens for drug monitoring are usually taken during the
drug’s highest therapeutic concentration (peak level) and at the drug’s
lowest therapeutic concentration (trough or residual level). Peak and
trough levels should be within the therapeutic range directed by the
physician.
The drugs are listed by their generic names, not their brand names.
A 
Physician’s Desk Reference
 that lists pharmaceuticals by the generic
and brand name will be helpful as you code drug testing and assays.
One location of Drug Testing codes in the index of the CPT manual
is under the main term “Drug,” subtermed by the reason for the tests
—analysis or confirmation. Therapeutic Drug Assay subsection codes
can be found under the main term “Drug Assay” and subterms of the
material examined, for example, amikacin, digoxin.
EXERCISE 25-2
Therapeutic Drug Testing and Drug
Assays
Assign the correct CPT and ICD-10-CM codes for the following drug
tests:
1 
Drug screen of cocaine, presumptive, read by instrument assisted
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Identify the amount of total digoxin in the blood (quantitative)
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Quantitative examination of blood for amikacin in a patient with
fever and immune neutropenia
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
____________________
4 
Examination of blood, quantitative for lithium in a patient with
manic depression syndrome
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Evocative/suppression testing
Evocative/Suppression (80400-80439) testing is performed to measure
the effect of evocative or suppressive agents on chemical constituents.
For example, 80400 is reported when a patient undergoes testing to
determine whether adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) is being
produced in the body. The patient may have adrenal gland
insufficiency. Note that following each of the code descriptions is a
statement of the services that must have been provided for the code to
be reported. For example, the requirement to report 80400 ACTH
stimulation panel is “Cortisol (82533 × 2)” or two cortisol tests were
performed. Code 80400 bundles two units of 82533 into one code.
Before you can assign 80400, however, you must read the code
description for 82533 to ensure that the code reports the correct test.
 
CAUTION 
Remember that the codes from the Pathology and Laboratory section are only
for the tests performed and do not reflect the complete service provided to the
patient.
To code the components of Evocative/Suppression Testing consider
the following:
■
 
If the physician 
supplied
 the agent, report the supply using 99070
from the Medicine section or a HCPCS code.
■
 
If the physician 
administered
 the agent, report the infusion or
injection with codes 96365-96379 from the Medicine section.
■
 
If the test involved 
prolonged attendance
 by the physician, report
the service with the appropriate E/M code.
Consultations (clinical pathology)
A clinical pathologist, upon request from a primary care physician,
will perform a consultation to render additional medical
interpretation of test results. For example, a primary care physician
reviews lab test results and requests a clinical pathologist to review,
interpret, and prepare a written report on the findings, which
represents a clinical pathology consultation.
There are two codes under the subsection Consultations (80500,
80502). These consultations are based on whether the consultation was
limited or comprehensive. A 
limited consultation
 is one that was
done without the pathologist’s review of the medical record of the
patient, and a 
comprehensive consultation
 is one in which the
medical record was reviewed as a part of the consultative services.
When either of these consultation codes is submitted to a third-party
payer, the submission is accompanied by a written report.
These are not the only consultation codes in the Pathology and
Laboratory section of the CPT manual. There are also consultation
codes toward the end of the section in the Surgical 
Pathology
subsection (88321-88334) that report the services of a pathologist who
reviews and gives an opinion or advice concerning pathology slides,
specimens, material, or records that were prepared elsewhere or for
pathology consultation during surgery. Pathology consultations
during surgery are provided to examine tissue removed from a
patient during a surgical procedure. If the pathologist did not use a
microscope to examine the tissue, report 88329. If a microscope was
used to examine the tissue, report 88331 or 88332, depending on the
number of specimens that were examined.
A 
specimen
 is a sample of tissue from a suspect area; a 
block
 is a
frozen piece of a specimen; and a 
section
 is a slice of a frozen block. A
pathologist prepares a specimen by cutting it into blocks and taking
sections from the blocks. The preparation of a frozen section is
illustrated in 
Fig. 25-2
. The number of sections taken depends on the
judgment of the pathologist as to the number of areas of the specimen
that need to be examined. The frozen section is placed (mounted) on a
slide or held by other means that allow the pathologist to view the
tissue under a microscope.
 
CODING SHOT
Each specimen may be reported separately, but each slide from that
specimen may not.
 
FIGURE 25–2
Frozen section preparation.
When one block is sectioned and examined, the service of
examining that first section is reported using 88331. The second and
subsequent sections of the same block are included in the reporting of
88331. If another block from another area (a second block) was
sectioned, the first section would be reported using 88331, and
subsequent sections from the second block using 88332. You cannot
use 88332 without first reporting 88331. Code 88332 is marked as an
add-on code (one that is used only with another code), its function is
to report subsequent sections that were examined.
CMS RULES
The edits bundle 
88329
 (pathology consultation during surgery) with
88331
 (first tissue block) and 
88332
 (each additional tissue block). By
issuing this guideline, CMS includes the frozen sections in the
consultation bundle, which would usually be reported separately.
Urinalysis, molecular pathology, and
chemistry
Many types of tests are located under the Urinalysis, Molecular
Pathology, and Chemistry subsections (81000-84999). Urinalysis codes
are for 
nonspecific
 tests performed on urine. Chemistry codes are for
specific
 tests performed on material from any source (e.g., urine,
blood, breath, feces, sputum) (
Fig. 25-3
). For example, a urinalysis
using a dipstick (81000-81003) would report the presence and quantity
of the following constituents: bilirubin, glucose, hemoglobin, ketones,
leukocytes, nitrite, pH, protein, specific gravity, and urobilinogen.
Any number of these constituents may be analyzed and reported
using a code from the Urinalysis subsection (81000-81099). However,
if the physician ordered an analysis of the urine specifically to
determine the presence of urobilinogen (reduced bilirubin) and the
exact amount of urobilinogen present (quantitative analysis), you
would choose a code (84580) from the Chemistry subsection. The main
things to remember when coding from these two subsections are:
1. 
Identify specific tests
2. 
Determine if the test was automated (by machine) or nonautomated
(manual)
3. 
Number of tests performed
4. 
Identify combination codes for similar types of tests
5. 
Whether the results are qualitative or quantitative
6. 
Method of testing
EXERCISE 25-3
Urinalysis, Molecular Pathology, and
Chemistry
Code the following:
1 
An automated urinalysis without microscopy
CPT Code: ____________________
 
FIGURE 25–3
Urinalysis with chemical reagent strips.
2 
Urinalysis, microscopic only
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Albumin, serum
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Total bilirubin
CPT Code: ____________________
5 
Gases, blood pH only, in a patient with respiratory failure
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
Sodium, urine, in a patient with congestive heart failure
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
7 
Uric acid, blood in a patient with acute gouty arthritis
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
The Molecular Pathology codes are divided into Tier 1 and Tier 2
codes. Tier 1 codes (81161, 81200-81383) report services for molecular
assays that are more commonly performed. For example, 81211 is an
essay to determine the presence of a breast cancer gene—BRCA1
(breast cancer 1) and BRCA2 (breast cancer 2). There are many
conditions in which a genetic predisposition can be predicted, such as
cystic fibrosis and colon cancer. Tier 2 codes 81400-81479 involve less
commonly performed analyses and are arranged by the required level
of technical resources and the level of physician interpretation or
other qualified health professional.
Hematology and coagulation
The Hematology and Coagulation subsection contains codes (85002-
85999) based on the various blood-drawing methods and tests. The
method used to perform the test is often what determines code
assignment. A blood count is used to measure the kind and number of
cells in the blood, such as red and white blood cells. It is a commonly
used test to detect various abnormalities in the blood. Blood counts
can be manual or automated (
Fig. 25-4
), with many variations of the
tests. For example, codes in the range 85004-85049 are blood count
codes divided by method (manual or automated) and type of count,
such as white blood count (WBC, 85004-85009) or a complete blood
count (CBC, 85025, 85027). To accurately code a blood count, the
method and the type of the count must be documented.
 
FIGURE 25–4
Hematology analyzer.
There are codes within the Hematology and Coagulation subsection
for blood smear and bone marrow smear interpretations (85060,
85097). When a physician procures the bone marrow by means of
aspiration, the service is reported with a code from the Surgery
section (38220); but that is only part of the service. The other part of
the service is the pathology analysis of the aspirated specimen. As the
coder in a clinic setting, you may be reporting only the surgical
services or only the pathology/laboratory services or a combination of
both. When reporting the surgical services, always review the
pathology report as a part of the code assignment, and when
reporting the pathology services, always review the operative report.
There are many blood coagulation tests located in the Hematology
and Coagulation subsection. The codes are divided based on the
particular factor being tested. Great care must be taken to ensure that
the correct coagulation factor has been reported based on the
information in the medical record. Coagulation factor tests analyze the
level of certain proteins in the blood that enable the blood to congeal
properly. Low levels of a factor may result in excessive bleeding and
high levels may lead to clot formation (thrombosis). For example,
85610 reports 
a test to assess the level of factor II (also known as a
prothrombin). This test is often performed when a patient is on a
blood thinning medication and the physician wants to determine if
the factor is at the optimal level.
Most of the tests in the Hematology and Coagulation subsection can
be located in the index of the CPT manual under the name of the test,
such as prothrombin time, coagulation time, or hemogram.
EXERCISE 25-4
Hematology and Coagulation
Code the following:
1 
Blood count by an automated hemogram (RBC, WBC, Hgb, Hct, and
platelet count)
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Blood count by an automated hemogram and platelet count with
complete differential white blood cell count in a patient with
anemia due to acute blood loss
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Automated RBC
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
Interpretation of a bone marrow smear in a patient with acute
leukemia, in remission
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
As you can see, there are many variations of just a blood count test!
Read the medical record and code descriptions carefully before
assigning the codes.
Immunology
Immunology codes (86000-86804) report identification of conditions of
the immune system caused by the action of antibodies (e.g.,
hypersensitivity, allergic reactions, immunity, and alterations of body
tissue).
EXERCISE 25-5
Immunology
Code the following:
1 
ANA (antinuclear antibody) titer
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
ASO (antistreptolysin O) screen
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Cold agglutinin screen in a patient with acute upper respiratory
infections
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Transfusion medicine
The Transfusion Medicine subsection codes (86850-86999) report tests
performed on blood or blood products. Tests include screening of
blood (
Fig. 25-5
) for antibodies, Coombs testing, autologous blood
collection and processing, blood typing, compatibility testing, and
preparation of and treatments performed on blood and blood
products.
 
FIGURE 25–5
Blood transfusion.
Transfusion of blood and blood components is reported with codes
from a variety of locations. For example, to report the actual blood
transfusion, assign 36430 from the Surgery section of the CPT manual.
You must also report the substance being transfused, such as whole
blood, HCPCS code P9010 per unit or red blood cells, P9021 per unit.
The blood bank would provide and report the collection, processing,
and storing of the autologous blood with 86890.
EXERCISE 25-6
Transfusion Medicine
Code the following:
1 
ABO and Rh blood typing, serologic
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
2 
Irradiation of blood product, 3 units
CPT Code: ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Microbiology
Microbiology codes (87003-87999) report the study of microorganisms
and include bacteriology (study of bacteria), mycology (study of
fungi), parasitology (study of parasites), and virology (study of
viruses). For example, 
Fig. 25-6
 illustrates a Petri dish used to culture
microbes. Culture codes for the identification of organisms as well as
the identification of sensitivities of the organism to antibiotics (called
culture and sensitivity) are located in this subsection. Culture codes
must be read carefully because some codes report screening only to
detect the presence of an organism; some codes indicate the
identification of specific organisms; and others indicate additional
sensitivity testing to determine which antibiotic would be best for
treatment of the specified bacteria. You report all tests performed on
the basis of whether they are quantitative or qualitative and/or a
sensitivity study.
 
QUICK CHECK 25-2
1. 
According to the Microbiology Guidelines, how do you report
multiple specimens submitted on the same day?
_________________________________________________________
 
FIGURE 25–6
Mold growing in Petri dish.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 25-7
Microbiology
Code the following:
1 
HIV-1, quantification
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Streptococcus, group A, using an amplified probe method in a
patient with headache and fever
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
3 
Quantification of 
Gardnerella vaginalis,
 herpes simplex, and 
Candida
species, in a patient with bacterial vaginosis
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________, ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
Direct probe method of mycobacterial tuberculosis, herpes simplex
virus, and 
Chlamydia trachomatis
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________, ____________________
5 
Bacterial culture of urine, quantitative with colony count for
urination frequency
 
CPT Code(s): ____________________
 
ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Anatomic pathology
Anatomic Pathology codes (88000-88099) report examination of body
fluids or tissues in postmortem (after death) examination. Postmortem
examination involves the completion of gross, microscopic, and
limited autopsies. Codes are divided according to the extent of the
examination. This subsection also contains codes for forensic
examination and coroner’s call. For example, some codes report an
examination without the central nervous system (88000, 88020), with
the brain (88005, 88025), with the brain and the spinal cord (88007,
88027), etc. There are two codes for each extent because one is a gross
examination and one is a microscopic examination.
Cytopathology and cytogenic studies
The Cytopathology subsection codes (88104-88199) report the
laboratory work performed to determine whether cellular changes are
present. For example, a very common cytopathology procedure is the
Papanicolaou smear (Pap smear). Cytopathology may also be
performed on fluids that have been aspirated from a site to identify
cellular changes. Cytogenetic Studies (88230-88299) include tests
performed for genetic and chromosomal studies.
 
QUICK CHECK 25-3
1. 
Which codes report conventional Pap smears examined using non-
Bethesda reporting? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
Surgical pathology
Surgical Pathology codes (88300-88399) describe the evaluation of
specimens to determine the pathology of disease processes. When
choosing the correct code for pathology, identify the source of the
specimen and the reason for the surgical procedure. The Surgical
Pathology subsection codes are divided into six levels (Levels I
through VI) based on the specimen examined and the level of work
required by the pathologist. Pathology testing is performed on all
tissue removed from the body. The surgical pathology classification
level is determined by the complexity of the pathologic examination.
 
From the Trenches
“Being certified opens many doors, but it also gives a level of credibility and
confidence to your work, which makes a difference when dealing with other
professions.”
KEITH
Level I
 pathology code 88300 identifies specimens that normally do
not need to be viewed under a microscope for pathologic diagnosis
(e.g., a tooth)—those for which the probability of disease or
malignancy is minimal.
Level II
 pathology code 88302 deals with those tissues that are usually
considered normal tissue and have been removed not because of the
probability of the presence of disease or malignancy, but for some
other reason (e.g., a fallopian tube for sterilization, foreskin of a
newborn).
Level III
 pathology code 88304 is assigned for specimens with a low
probability of disease or malignancy. For example, a gallbladder
may be neoplastic (benign or malignant), but when the gallbladder
is removed for cholecystitis (inflammation of the gallbladder), it is
usually inflamed from chronic disease and not because of cancerous
changes.
Level IV
 pathology code 88305 designates a higher probability of
malignancy or decision making for disease pathology. For example,
a uterus is removed because of a diagnosis of prolapse. There is a
possibility that the uterus is malignant or that there are other causes
of disease pathology.
Level V
 pathology code 88307 classifies more complex pathology
evaluations (e.g., examination of a uterus that was removed for
reasons other than prolapse or neoplasm).
Level VI
 pathology code 88309 includes examination of neoplastic
tissue or very involved specimens, such as a total resection of a
colon.
For example, 88305 reports examination of tissue from a breast
biopsy that does not require microscopic evaluation of the margins or
tissue from a breast reduction; 88307 reports examination of tissue
from the excision of a breast lesion that does require microscopic
evaluation of the margins and a partial/simple mastectomy; and 88309
reports examination of tissue from a mastectomy with regional lymph
node. The probability of cancer increases with each code.
 
CODING SHOT
A specimen is defined as tissue submitted for examination. If two
specimens of the same area are received and examined, each
specimen is reported. For example, if two separately identified anus
tags are received and each is examined, report 88304 × 2. If one anus
tag is received and two different areas of the tag are examined, report
88304 only once.
The remaining codes at the end of the subsection classify
specialized procedures, utilization of stains, consultations performed,
preparations used, and/or instrumentation needed to complete
testing.
The surgical pathology codes are located in the index under the
main term “Pathology and Laboratory” and subterm “Surgical
Pathology.”
EXERCISE 25-8
Surgical Pathology
Code the following using one of the six surgical pathology codes in
the CPT manual:
1 
The specimen is a uterus, tubes, and ovaries. The procedure was an
abdominal hysterectomy for ovarian cancer.
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
The specimen is a portion of a lung. The procedure was a left lower
lobe segmental resection.
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
The specimen is the prostate. The procedure was a transurethral
resection of the prostate.
CPT Code: ____________________
4 
What is the surgical pathology code for the following pathology
report?
CPT Code: ____________________
 
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Other procedures
Other Procedures includes miscellaneous testing on body fluids, the
use of special instrumentation, and testing performed on oocytes and
sperm.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 25, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 The pathology and laboratory section of CPT is formatted according
to __________________________ of test performed.
2 The collection of a blood sample is included in the laboratory section
codes. (T or F) ______________________________
3 What type of general tests determine how much of a certain thing is
in the body (say, calcium)? ______________________
4 In a panel test, groups of tests may be performed. What is the rule
for coding a panel code? _________________________
5 These tests are performed to identify possible use or non-use of a
drug that is not a known, prescribed medication.
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
6 These tests only determine the presence of a substance.
______________________________________________________
7 What lab testing refers to a class of tests performed in which one
substance is measured both before and after the administration of
another substance?
____________________________________________________________________
8 A clinical pathologist consultation was performed without a review
of the patient’s medical record. This is considered what type of
consultation?
_____________________________________________________________________________
9 Urinalysis codes are for
__________________________________________________________
tests performed on urine.
10 What test is used to measure the kind and number of cells in the
blood? ________________________________________
11 Immunology codes report identification of conditions of the
immune system caused by the action of _________________.
12 What is meant by autologous blood transfusion?
___________________________________________________________
13 Bacteria are microorganisms that grow everywhere. We can collect
and grow them in specially prepared ________ dishes.
14 The anatomic pathology codes are divided according to what
criteria? __________________________________________
15 Where will one find the laboratory work performed to determine
whether cellular changes are present? _______________
16 How many levels from the Surgical Pathology subsection describe
the specimen and work by the pathologist? ___________
17 What subsection contains a code for an unlisted miscellaneous
pathology test? ___________________________________
18 What surgical pathology level contains a gross and microscopic
examination on partial kidney? ______________________
Chapter 25, part I, theory
Without the use of the CPT manual, complete the following:
1 The Pathology and Laboratory section of the CPT manual is
formatted according to the type of _________ (s) performed.
2 Laboratories have built-in ________________ that allow additional
tests to be performed without the written order of the physician.
3 Codes that are grouped according to the usual laboratory work
ordered by a physician for diagnosis or screening of various diseases
or conditions are ______________________________ oriented.
4 Can you use a reduced service modifier with pathology or
laboratory codes?
Yes  No
5 Will the medical record contain the method used to perform the
test?
Yes  No
Chapter 25, part II, practical
Answer the following (Separate multiple codes with a comma and then a
space in your response. XXXXX, XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in
front of your modifier answers. XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units
with an x and spaces. XXXXX x X):
6 The Hematology and Coagulation subsections contain codes based
on the various testing methods and tests. The method used to do the
test is often the code determiner. Blood cell counts can be manual or
automated, with many variations of the tests. What would the code be
for an automated blood count (hemogram) with automated
differential WBC count? A manual blood count (hemogram) with
manual cell count?
Automated CPT Code: ____________________
Manual CPT Code: ____________ × ___________
Code the following three cases with the correct pathology code from the
CPT:
7 The specimen is tonsils and adenoids. The procedure is a
tonsillectomy with adenoidectomy.
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
8 The specimen is an appendix. The procedure is an incidental
appendectomy.
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
9 The specimen is a tooth. The procedure is an odontectomy, gross
examination only.
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
Code the following:
10 Western Blot of blood, with interpretation and report
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
11 Vitamin K analysis of blood
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
12 Quantitative analysis of urine for alkaloids
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
13 Three specimens of gastric secretions for total gastric acid
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
14 Blood analysis for HGH
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
15 Total insulin
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
16 LDL cholesterol using direct measurements
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
17 Blood count (leukocyte only): one manual cell count
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
18 Blood smear interpretation
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
19 PTT of whole blood
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
20 Sedimentation rate, automated for fever and swelling in hand
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
21 Lee and White coagulation time
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
22 Clotting factor XII (Hageman factor) for excessive bleeding
menopausal onset
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
23 Blood typing for paternity test, ABO, Rh, and MN
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
24 Culture of urine for bacteria with colony count for pain on
urination
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
25 Schlichter test for complaints of leg pain and fever
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
26 Postmortem examination, gross only, with brain and spinal cord
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
27 Therapeutic drug assay for total digoxin and vancomycin, patient
has chronic sinus bradycardia
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
28 Pathology consultation during surgery
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
CHAPTER 26
Medicine
 
“Teamwork is so important! You have to be able to work with other
people, and keep your mind open at all times. . . . Coding can be
subjective; there is no one who knows everything.”
Stephanie A. Lewis, CPC, ACS-EM, CCP
Compliance Analyst
 
University of Missouri Health Care
 
Columbia, Missouri
CHAPTER TOPICS
Format
Introduction to Immunizations
Psychiatry
Biofeedback
Dialysis
Gastroenterology
Ophthalmology
Special Otorhinolaryngologic Services
Cardiovascular
Pulmonary
Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Endocrinology
Neurology and Neuromuscular Procedures
Central Nervous System Assessments/Tests
Health and Behavior Assessment/Intervention
Hydration
Chemotherapy Administration
Photodynamic Therapy
Special Dermatological Procedures
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
Medical Nutrition Therapy
Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment (OMT)
Chiropractic Manipulative Treatment (CMT)
Non-Face-to-Face Nonphysician Services
Special Services, Procedures, and Reports
Other Services and Procedures
Home Health Procedures/Services
Medication Therapy Management Services
Chapter Review
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Analyze the format of the Medicine section.
2 
Report psychiatric services.
3 
Identify biofeedback services.
4 
List components of dialysis reporting.
5 
Demonstrate ability to report gastrointestinal services.
6 
Understand ophthalmology and otorhinolaryngologic reporting.
7 
Report cardiovascular services.
8 
Identify services reported with pulmonary codes.
9 
List the important elements of coding allergy and clinical
immunology services.
10 
Report endocrine services.
11 
Define neurology and neuromuscular services.
12 
Demonstrate an understanding of central nervous system
assessment and intervention.
13 
Analyze chemotherapy services.
14 
Report special services and dermatologic procedures.
15 
Code physical medicine and rehabilitation services.
16 
Report active wound management.
17 
Define osteopathic and chiropractic services.
18 
Understand non-face-to-face services.
19 
Code special services, procedures, and reports.
20 
Report medical services using Medicine section codes.
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
The Medicine section (90281-99607) reports diagnostic and
therapeutic services that are generally 
noninvasive
 (not entering a
body cavity), but there are also 
invasive
 (entering a body cavity)
procedures in the section, such as cardiac catheterization. The section
begins with Subsection Information and Guidelines applicable to all of
the Medicine section codes, such as Add-on Codes, Separate
Procedures, Unlisted Service/Procedure, Special Report, and Supplied
Materials.
The various subsections of Medicine contain many specific notes to
be applied with a certain group of codes, so be certain to read all notes
that pertain to the group of codes with which you are working.
Format
Take a moment now to review the Medicine section in the CPT
manual to have an overview of the subsections.
Many specialized types of tests are located in the Medicine section
(e.g., biofeedback, audiologic function tests, electrocardiograms).
Codes in this section do not usually include the supplies used in the
testing, therapy, or diagnostic treatments unless specifically stated in
the code description or guidelines. You report supplies, including
drugs, separately unless otherwise instructed in the code information.
CPT code 99070 is the supplies and materials code used to identify the
supplying of drugs, trays, supplies, or materials needed to provide 
the
service or the specific HCPCS supply code, which is usually what the
payer will require. For example, 
Fig. 26-1
 illustrates the code for the
service of a prescription for corneal contact lenses (also known as
contacts, see 
Fig. 26-2
) for both eyes (92310). When the lenses and the
prescription services are provided, both the lenses and the
prescription service are reported. The supply of contact lenses may be
reported as part of the service of fitting or reported separately using
the appropriate HCPCS Level II supply code (V2500-V2599).
Reporting the supply of the lens depends on the third-party payer
guidelines.
FIGURE 26–1
Some codes are for the supply only.
 
FIGURE 26–2
Contact lenses.
Introduction to immunizations
There are two types of immunization—active and passive. 
Active
immunization
 is the type given when it is anticipated that the person
will be in contact with the disease. Active immunization agents can be
toxoids or vaccines. Toxoids are bacteria that have been made
nontoxic and when injected, produce an immune response that builds
protection against a disease. Vaccines are viruses that are given in
small doses and cause an immune response. 
Passive immunization
does not cause an immune response; rather, the injected material
contains a high level of antibodies against a disease (e.g., rabies,
hepatitis B, tetanus), called immune globulins.
The first three subsections in the Medicine section are:
■
 
Immune Globulins, Serum or Recombinant Products
■
 
Immunization Administration for Vaccines/Toxoids
■
 
Vaccines, Toxoids
Immune globulins
The immune globulins (90281-90399) are passive immunization agents
obtained from pooled human plasma that is immune to a particular
disease.
The codes in this subsection identify only the immune globulin
product
 and must be reported with the appropriate 
administration
code (96365-96368, 96372, 96374, or 96375 as appropriate).
 
QUICK CHECK 26-1
1. 
Immune globulins are ____________ injections.
a. 
Active
b. 
Passive
c. 
Both a and b
d. 
Neither a nor b
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix
C
)
Codes in the Immune Globulins subsection are categorized
according to the:
■
 
Type of immune globulin (rabies, hepatitis B, etc.)
■
 
Method of injection (IM, IV, SC, etc.)
■
 
Type of dose (full dose, mini-dose, etc.)
Immunization administration for
vaccines/toxoids
The Immunization Administration subsection codes (90460-90474) are
reported in conjunction with the Vaccines, Toxoids subsection codes
(90476-90749). Immunization reporting requires two codes: one to
report the 
administration
 and one to report the 
substance
administered. A variety of administration methods are utilized to
deliver the vaccine/toxoid: percutaneous, intradermal, subcutaneous,
intramuscular, intranasal, or oral. The administration codes are
divided based on the 
method
 of administration and in some codes,
the patient 
age, when administered with physician counseling.
Report each dose administered—single or combination with the
appropriate administration code.
■
 
Codes 90460-90461 report immunization administration for patients
through age 18 and for which counseling has been provided to the
patient’s family regarding the vaccine/toxoid. Report 90460 for each
vaccine administered. For vaccines with multiple components
(combined vaccines), report 90460 in conjunction with 90461 for
each additional component in the vaccine.
■
 
Codes 90471-90474 report immunizations at which the physician did
NOT provide counseling for patients of 
any age,
 including patients
through age 18.
For example, you can report multiple administrations by reporting
90471 for the first administration and then reporting 90472 for each
administration after the first.
Example without counseling
90471
Administration
 service for tetanus
90749
Tetanus toxoid (substance injected, IM)
90472
Administration
 service for rubella
90749
Rubella virus (substance injected, SC)
90472
Administration
 service for varicella (may require modifier -59, based on payer guidelines)
90716
Varicella virus vaccine, split virus (substance injected, SC)
Or you can report the first administration with 90471, as you would
usually do, and then report 90472 times the number of injections after
the first one.
Example—Administration
90471
Administration service for tetanus
90472 × 2
Administration service, rubella and diphtheria
If several vaccines were administered, report the service as:
Example—Multiple Vaccines
90471
Administration
 service for tetanus and diphtheria
90714
Tetanus and diphtheria toxoids (substances injected, IM)
90472
Administration
 service for rubella
90749
Rubella virus (substance injected, SC)
CMS RULES
Medicare reimburses for tetanus injections (90749 unlisted vaccine)
when given for an acute injury to a person who is incompletely
immunized. When a tetanus booster is given to a patient in the
absence of an injury, the injection (90749) is not covered by Medicare.
Vaccines, toxoids
The Vaccines, Toxoids subsection codes (90476-90749) report vaccine
products for immunizations. The subsection contains many codes for
a single disease (e.g., 90716 Varicella virus vaccine [VAR]) as well as
codes for a combination of diseases (e.g., 90700 for diphtheria, tetanus,
and acellular pertussis [DTaP]). In many of the code descriptions,
specific ages or dosages are identified. For example, 90658, trivalent (3
viruses) influenza virus vaccine, specifies 0.5 mL, whereas code 90657,
trivalent (IIV3) influenza virus vaccine, specifies 0.25 mL. Vaccines
have adult, pediatric/adolescent, or dosage amounts listed on the label
of the vial. You must carefully review the description of the vaccine
product to determine which disease is specified in the code you are
assigning. When one code is available to describe multiple products
given, the combination code must be assigned. If each vaccine were to
be listed separately when a combination vaccine was administered, it
would be considered unbundling.
CMS RULES
When reporting an adult dose of a pneumococcal vaccine (90732) to
Medicare, the pneumococcal administration code is 
G0009
 with a
diagnosis code of 
Z23
 (prophylactic vaccination, streptococcus
pneumoniae). Once Medicare has assigned a HCPCS Level II
administration code for a vaccine, the CPT administration code is not
accepted.
 
From the Trenches
“I often tell coders and auditors I work with that they are detectives and
should think and act like a detective, never giving up until they have dug up
all the information that they can to back up what they are telling a physician
or non-physician practitioner.”
STEPHANIE
 
CAUTION
There are often multiple codes available for variations of the product. For
example, there are eight codes with combinations of diphtheria. Read all
descriptions carefully before assigning a code.
There are codes with schedules for a vaccine, such as a three-dose or
four-dose schedule. For example, 90633 is a two-dose hepatitis A
vaccine that is intended to be administered on a two-dose schedule.
Each time the vaccine is administered, 90633 is reported along with
the date of the injection. The term “schedule” refers to the number of
doses provided and the timing of the administration. The doses and
timing must be exactly as specified in the code.
The CPT Guidelines state that modifier -51 (multiple procedures)
should not be reported for the vaccines/toxoids when performed with
administration procedures. Most payers want you to report the
administration codes multiple times or use the “times” symbol (×) to
indicate the number of injections given.
If a patient is given a vaccine in the course of an E/M service, the
administration and Vaccines/Toxoids codes are assigned in addition
to the E/M code. Some third-party payers require a -25 modifier on the
E/M code, so be certain to check with your local payer on how to
submit the E/M code.
 
CODING SHOT
If the only service is administration of a vaccine and no other service
was provided, do not report an E/M service.
CMS RULES
If a Medicare patient receives reasonable and necessary services
constituting an office visit level of service, the physician may bill for
the office visit, the vaccine and the administration of the vaccine. Do
not report 99211 instead of the administration service when only the
administration is performed.
Hepatitis B vaccines and the administration are available to
Medicare beneficiaries who are at high or intermediate risk of
contracting hepatitis B. Diagnosis code Z23 (prophylactic vaccination
against viral hepatitis) must be submitted to demonstrate the medical
necessity. The administration code for Medicare is G0010
(administration of hepatitis B vaccine) and for other payers the
administration is 90471.
 
CODING SHOT
The diagnosis codes Z23 report the need for a prophylactic
(preventative) vaccination or inoculation. These codes can be located
in the Index of the ICD-10-CM manual under the main term
“Vaccination.”
EXERCISE 26-1
Immunizations
To report an E/M service with a vaccine service, a separate
identifiable E/M service must have been provided and documented in
the medical record. The following vaccines were administered to a
variety of patients. If they have a brief history and examination
performed to assess vaccine needs and general health status no E/M
service will be reported except if the question indicates there was a
“separate service” provided.
1 
A parent takes a 9-year-old child to the child’s physician for a
poliomyelitis vaccine, IM. The physician’s assistant evaluates the
child (established patient) and administers the vaccine to the child.
CPT Codes: ____________________ (poliovirus
vaccine), ____________________
(administration)
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
An established patient (10 years old); the only service for the visit is
an injection of DTP (diphtheria, tetanus toxoid, pertussis) and
poliovirus. Services were provided by the nurse, at the direction of
the physician.
CPT Codes: ____________________ (DTP vaccine),
____________________ (poliovirus vaccine),
____________________ ____________________
(administrations)
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
An established patient, a 1-year-old, is brought in for a well-baby
checkup (separate service) by the physician, and the following are
given: DT and IM injectable poliomyelitis. The physician counseled
the parent on the vaccines. A comprehensive preventative medicine
evaluation was provided by the physician.
CPT Codes: ____________________ (E/M),
____________________ (vaccine),
____________________ (vaccine),
________________ ________________
(administrations)
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________ (child
examination), ________________ (immunization
encounter), ________________ (counseling)
4 
A 64-year-old established patient comes in for a trivalent influenza
virus vaccine 0.5 mL that is administered intramuscularly by the
nurse. The vaccine is the only service provided at that visit.
CPT Codes: ____________________ (vaccination),
____________________ (administration)
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
5 
A new patient, 30 years old, comes for an office visit to evaluate her
hypothyroid status at which time the physician does an expanded
problem focused history and physical examination (separate
service) and also administers a DTP vaccine.
CPT Codes: ____________________ (E/M),
____________________ (vaccine),
____________________ (administration)
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
6 
A parent brings an 18-month-old infant (established patient) for a
well-baby examination (separate service) at which the physician
administers a vaccine intramuscularly for diphtheria and tetanus
toxoid (DT) after counseling the parent on the vaccines.
CPT Codes: ____________________ (E/M),
____________________ (vaccine),
____________________, ____________________
(administration)
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ____________________
7 
A 50-year-old established patient presents to the nurse for a trivalent
(IIV3), 0.5 mL flu shot.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Psychiatry
The Psychiatry subsection (90785-90899) has a lengthy note under the
heading detailing the use of psychiatric codes. If psychiatric
treatments are rendered on the same day as E/M services, both the
E/M service and the psychiatric treatment are reported with one code
from the Psychiatry subsection. For example, if a patient is admitted
to the hospital with a drug overdose secondary to depression, and the
physician spends 60 minutes in crisis psychotherapy with the patient
several hours after he was admitted to the hospital, services are
reported with 90839 (Other Psychotherapy) for the psychiatric
treatment and medical evaluation/management on the same day.
Code 90839 includes the development of orders, the review and
interpretation of laboratory work or other diagnostic studies, and the
review of therapy reports and other information from the medical
record. If the psychiatric treatment is provided on a different day than
the E/M service, a code from the E/M section would be reported in
addition to the psychiatry code. You will work closely with third-
party payers to determine any specific regional instructions for coding
psychiatric services.
Partial hospitalization
 refers to a hospital setting in which the
patients are in the hospital during the day and return to their homes
in the evenings and on weekends. The facilities may be open only
during the day, 5 days a week, although there are also facilities that
are open 7 days a week. When a physician admits a patient to a partial
hospital facility, the physician is responsible for preparing all of the
admission paperwork that is prepared for admission to an acute care
hospital. E/M Initial Hospital Care and Subsequent Hospital Care
codes (99221-99233) report inpatient stays. The psychiatric services the
physician provides to the patient are listed separately unless the E/M
service and psychiatric service are provided on the same day. These
same-day services are reported with codes from the Psychiatry
subsection.
Specific descriptions of services included in each of the codes
appear in the Psychiatry subsection. Some codes reflect evaluation or
diagnostic services, such as CPT code 90791 (diagnostic evaluation);
some reflect therapeutic procedures, such as 90832 (psychotherapy);
and still others, located in the Central Nervous System
Assessments/Tests, report psychological testing, such as code 96101
(psychological testing, per hour).
A 
psychiatrist
 is a physician who specializes in psychiatry, the
practice of diagnosing and treating mental disorders. A 
psychologist
is not a physician but is a qualified specialist in psychiatry. States have
varying regulations about how a psychologist reports services
provided, and some states require a psychologist to provide and
report services only under the supervision of a psychiatrist. Third-
party payers may also restrict the types of service a psychologist may
report for reimbursement.
Time is the major billing factor in the Psychiatry subsection.
Diagnostic and therapeutic time must be documented in the patient’s
record to provide accurate billing.
Codes 90791 and 90792, psychiatric diagnostic evaluation and
comprehensive psychiatric service, are described as the elicitation
(gathering) of a complete medical (including past, family, social) and
psychiatric history, establishment of a tentative diagnosis, and an
evaluation of the patient’s ability and willingness to work to solve the
mental problem. This service includes a complete mental status exam.
Information may be obtained from the patient, other physicians,
and/or family. There may be overlapping of the medical and
psychiatric history depending on the problem. An E/M service may be
substituted for the initial interview procedure, including consultation
codes (99241-99245), provided the required elements of the E/M
service are provided. Consultation services require, in addition to the
history and examination, a written report of the consultation’s opinion
or advice. Consultation does not include psychiatric treatment.
Psychotherapy is the therapeutic treatment of a psychological
disorder or behavior and is reported with codes 90832-90838. The
codes are time-based (30, 45, or 60 minutes) and subdivided based on
if the psychotherapy was provided in addition to another primary
procedure. The medical record must identify the time spent providing
the psychotherapy service. If the 
time spent providing the service is
not recorded on the medical record, the physician should be queried.
If no time can be identified, report the service with an E/M code, not a
Psychotherapy code. The psychotherapy service is provided to the
patient only.
Crisis psychotherapy (90839, 90840) provides treatment to a patient
experiencing a reaction to a more specific event or situation; for
example, a drug overdose, attempted suicide, or an episode of severe
depression. Crisis psychotherapy focuses on the immediate
assessment and treatment of the patient in a crisis and is not intended
to treat chronic psychological conditions.
Some patients receive psychotherapy only and others receive
psychotherapy and medical E/M services. E/M services involve a
variety of responsibilities unique to the medical management of
psychiatric patients, such as medical diagnostic evaluation, drug
management when indicated, physician orders, interpretation of
laboratory or other medical diagnostic studies and observations,
review of activity therapy reports, the supervision of nursing and
ancillary personnel, and scheduling of hospital resources for diagnosis
and treatment, and leadership or direction of a treatment team.
The medical record must indicate the 
time
 spent in the
psychotherapy encounter and the therapeutic maneuvers, such as
behavior modification, supportive interactions, and interpretation of
unconscious motivation, that were applied to produce the therapeutic
change.
The medical record should document the symptoms, the goals of
therapy, and the methods of monitoring the outcome. It should also
document why the chosen therapy is the appropriate treatment
modality either instead of or in addition to another form of psychiatric
treatment.
EXERCISE 26-2
Psychiatry
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Diagnostic psychotherapy evaluation in office for 30 minutes. The
patient was diagnosed with chronic paranoid psychosis.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Psychological testing, 2 hours, administered by a physician. The
patient presents with moderate undersocialized aggressive outburst
conduct disorder.
CPT Code: ____________________ × ____________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Psychiatric evaluation of tests, medical records, or hospital data to
make appropriate diagnosis for a 16-year-old male. Documentation
supports an overanxious disorder.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
A 70 minute psychotherapy session for a patient who presents in a
depressive state with tremors.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
 
(Answers are located in
Appendix B
)
Biofeedback
Biofeedback
 is the process of giving a person self-information. The
information can be used by patients to gain control over physiologic
processes, such as blood pressure, heart rate, or pain. Patients are
trained to use biofeedback by a professional and then continue the use
of the therapy on their own. Biofeedback training is often
incorporated in individual psychophysiologic therapy. When
biofeedback is part of the individual psychophysiologic therapy, one
code is reported for both the biofeedback training and the individual
psychophysiologic therapy (90875-90876).
Biofeedback codes (90901, 90911) are located in the CPT manual
index under the main terms “Training” and “Biofeedback.”
EXERCISE 26-3
Biofeedback
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A 40-year-old woman has been seen by the physician for several
individual psychiatric sessions as the patient attempts to give up a
two-pack-a-day cigarette 
addiction
 of 15 years’ continuous
duration. The patient is experiencing increased 
anxiety
 and
insomnia
, which is the reason for this visit. As a part of the last 30-
minute psychiatric session, the physician teaches the patient to use
biofeedback in an attempt to help her alleviate the generalized
anxiety and idiopathic insomnia. The patient is instructed to use the
biofeedback techniques three times a day until the next session.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________
2 
A 52-year-old man is referred to the physician by his primary care
physician for biofeedback to help regulate his blood pressure. The
patient was diagnosed with hypertensive heart disease. There is no
evidence of heart failure. The physician conducts a 60-minute
session during which the patient is trained in the use of
biofeedback.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Dialysis
Dialysis is the cleansing of the blood of waste products when it is not
possible for the body to perform the cleansing function adequately on
its own. Dialysis may be temporary, as in the case of a patient who has
acute renal failure from which he or she recovers, or permanent, as in
the case of a patient with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) who will not
recover without a kidney transplant.
The Dialysis subsection of the Medicine section (90935-90999) is
divided into types of dialysis (see 
Table 26-1
).
TABLE 26–1
TYPES OF DIALYSIS
Hemodialysis
Hemodialysis
 is the routing of blood and its waste products to the
outside of the body where it is filtered. After the blood is cleansed, it is
returned to the body. Hemodialysis codes (90935 and 90937) are
reported for each day the service is provided. The codes in the
hemodialysis category are based on the number of times the physician
evaluates the patient during the procedure.
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis
 (90945, 90947) involves using the peritoneal cavity
as a filter. Dialysis fluid is introduced into the cavity and left there for
several hours so cleansing can take place (
Fig. 26-3
). The dialysis fluid
is then drained from the peritoneal cavity. Peritoneal dialysis is
reported on the basis of each day the service is provided. Some
patients learn how to perform dialysis for themselves. Dialysis
teaching codes are located under Other Dialysis Procedures.
 
FIGURE 26–3
Peritoneal dialysis can be done by the patient. The
dialysis solution enters the peritoneal cavity by a catheter. After the
solution has been inside the patient for several hours, it is drained out
through the catheter.
End stage renal disease
The subheading (End Stage Renal Disease Services) deals with dialysis
of an ongoing nature. The 90951-90966 codes reflect all services
included in treating a patient with ESRD and are listed according to
patient age (e.g., younger than 2 years of age, 2-11 years of age) and
number of visits (1, 2-3, 4+) per month. Dialysis services are reported
as a monthly fee. For those cases in which a patient may be, for
example, visiting the area and will not require a full month of dialysis,
daily fees may be reported using codes 90967-90970 in the ESRD
category. Few third-party payers allow E/M codes to be reported in
addition to dialysis service codes. Most payers consider the dialysis
codes to be bundled to include all the treatment necessary for a
patient with renal disease, including the E/M services. To report a
separate E/M service, the condition would have to be unrelated to the
renal condition, and modifier -25 must be added to the E/M code. The
diagnosis code reported would also indicate that the E/M service was
unrelated to the ESRD service.
Dialysis is usually performed in an outpatient setting at a hospital
or other outpatient dialysis facility (
Fig. 26-4
). The physician services
are reported based on the 
type
 of dialysis the patient is receiving, the
complexity
 of the service, and the 
number
 of visits the physician
provides to the patient. The reporting of just one code covers all
physician visits to the dialysis laboratory during that month. During a
physician’s visit to the dialysis laboratory, the physician assesses the
patient while the patient is receiving dialysis. The monthly services
also include nutrition assessment and telephone calls.
 
FIGURE 26–4
Patient receiving hemodialysis.
Dialysis patients must sometimes be admitted to the hospital and
while in the hospital must continue to receive dialysis treatments.
When the physician assesses the inpatient while the patient is
undergoing dialysis, report 90935 (single visit) or 90937 (multiple
visits). Code 90937 may include a significant revision of the dialysis
prescription. If a hospitalized patient receiving peritoneal dialysis is
assessed by the physician, the physician services are reported with
90945 (single visit) and 90947 (multiple visits). Code 90947 may also
include a significant revision of the dialysis prescription. Modifier -26
is not used on these codes, as the code descriptions describe only the
physician service to the dialysis patient.
 
CODING SHOT
If a patient is admitted to the hospital and requires management of
his/her dialysis while in the hospital, the physician can report those
services but then cannot report the monthly service for the time
period the patient is in the hospital. The monthly service for services
provided when the patient was not in the hospital is then reported
with 90967-90970, which are per day codes.
When a patient does not receive a full month of dialysis in the
outpatient setting because of a kidney transplant, relocation, or death,
report the number of days the patient had dialysis. For example, a 50-
year-old patient receives peritoneal dialysis from March 1 through 10.
On March 11, the patient receives a kidney transplant. The 10 days of
service are reported with 90970 × 10.
“Dialysis” is the main term to be referenced in the CPT manual
index.
EXERCISE 26-4
Dialysis
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following dialysis
services:
1 
A 10-year-old patient with end-stage renal disease has 3 encounters
during a full month of hemodialysis treatment.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
2 
Hemodialysis for an inpatient with a single physician evaluation for
acute renal failure
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Peritoneal dialysis provided for an inpatient with repeated
physician evaluations. The patient has acute renal failure with
tubular necrosis.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
Define the following terms or abbreviations:
4 
peritoneal
______________________________________________________________________________________
5 
hemofiltration
___________________________________________________________________________________
6 
ESRD
_________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Gastroenterology
The Gastroenterology subsection (91010-91299) contains many types
of tests and treatments that are performed on the esophagus, stomach,
and intestine. Several intubation codes are listed in the
Gastroenterology subsection. You must carefully review the code
descriptions to determine which services are bundled into the code.
EXERCISE 26-5
Gastroenterology
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A 2-hour gastroesophageal reflux test with nasal catheter
intraluminal impedance electrode for detection of reflux. The
patient was diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Colon motility study of 7 hours with continuous recordings and
interpretation and report.
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Gastric intubation with aspiration and slide preparation for
cytology. The patient has persistent abdominal pain and loss of
appetite.
CPT Code: ____________________ (Surgery code)
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
Define the following terms:
4 
motility study
_______________________________________________________________________________
5 
manometric studies
__________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Ophthalmology
The notes located at the beginning of the Ophthalmology subsection
(92002-92499) describe the services included in the various types of
ophthalmologic services. Ophthalmology is a very specialized field
and ophthalmologists treat patients for a variety of diseases and
injuries. Often the services provided and documented do not
adequately fall into an E/M definition. Therefore, the AMA developed
specialized codes that deal specifically with ophthalmology services.
There are extensive subsection notes that are required reading before
you code in the subsection. The notes explain the levels of service and
present excellent examples to clarify the assignment of the codes.
The general ophthalmologic services (e.g., routine yearly eye
examinations) are located in the subheading General
Ophthalmological Services. The codes in this subsection are based on
whether the patient is a new or an established patient and on the
complexity of service provided. There are two levels of service
(intermediate and comprehensive). Of special note are the definitions
of new and established patients.
The definitions of the terms “new” and “established” patient are the
same as those used in the E/M section. You will recall that those
definitions are as follows:
New patient:
 One who has not received professional service from
the physician, or another physician of the exact same specialty and
subspecialty who belongs to the same group practice, within the past
3 years.
Established patient:
 One who has received professional services
from the physician, or another physician of the exact same specialty
and subspecialty who belongs to the same group practice, within the
past 3 years.
The subheading Special Ophthalmological Services contains
bilateral
 codes. Each service in this subheading is performed on both
eyes, and the codes do not require a modifier to indicate that two eyes
were examined or tested. In fact, should you need to report only one
eye from these codes, you add modifier -52 to indicate a reduced
service. It is a good idea to make a note next to the codes that are
bilateral in the CPT manual and also to make a note of modifier -52, to
reduce the service if it was performed for only one eye
.
Special Ophthalmological Service codes are those services that are
not normally performed in a general eye examination. Services in this
group are performed for medically indicated reasons. For example, an
ophthalmological examination under general anesthesia with
manipulation of the globe of the eye to determine the range of motion
(92018). The definitions of the codes are very comprehensive in
detailing the services involved with each code.
Other codes that are located in the Ophthalmology subsection
under the subheading Spectacle Services report the provision of
materials to the patient (e.g., spectacles, contact lenses, or ocular
prostheses). The refraction that is performed to determine the lens
prescription may be reported separately, depending on the policies set
by third-party payers.
The decision to assign an ophthalmology code or an E/M code is
determined by the service provided. The ophthalmology codes have
specific notes prior to code 92002 that serve as a guideline for an
intermediate or comprehensive service. Documentation should
include the chief complaint, history, and general medical examination.
Testing may include the following types of measures:
■
 
External examination, ophthalmoscopy, and biomicroscopy
■
 
Visual acuity (clarity of vision)
■
 
Basic sensorimotor examination (tests sensory and motor
coordination)
■
 
Confrontation visual fields (peripheral vision)
■
 
Tonometry (intraocular pressure)
■
 
Evaluation of complete visual system
■
 
May include mydriasis (excess dilation of pupil) for
ophthalmoscopy
■
 
Initiation of diagnosis and treatment programs
An 
intermediate
 ophthalmological service (92002, 92012) describes
an evaluation of a new or existing condition complicated with a new
diagnosis or management problem not necessarily relating to the
primary diagnosis.
A 
comprehensive
 service (92004, 92014) describes a general
evaluation of the complete visual system (
Fig. 26-5
). The
comprehensive services constitute a single service that may be
performed at different sessions but is reported only once.
 
FIGURE 26–5
Examination of the eye.
The initiation of a diagnostic and treatment program includes the
prescription of medication and arranging for special ophthalmological
diagnostic or treatment services, consultations, laboratory procedures,
and radiological services.
 
From the Trenches
“Coding is an evolving science; in order to be successful a coder needs to be
willing to use every day to the fullest by continuing their education and
learning something new and useful.”
STEPHANIE
 
QUICK CHECK 26-2
1. 
Many of the codes for Contact Lens and Spectacle services are
selected based on the diagnosis of aphakia. Define aphakia.
________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 26-6
Ophthalmology
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Established patient, comprehensive ophthalmologic examination
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Fitting of contact lens for treatment of ocular surface disease
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Serial tonography with multiple measurements of intraocular
pressure. The patient presented with preglaucoma.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
New patient, comprehensive ophthalmologic examination. The
patient presented with proliferative diabetic retinopathy. The
patient has Type 2 diabetes mellitus under good control.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
 
(Answers are located in
Appendix B
)
Special otorhinolaryngologic services
The services in this subsection (92502-92700) are special tests or
studies of the ears, nose, and larynx. Audiology (hearing) testing is
also located in the Special Otorhinolaryngologic Services subsection.
An audiology test may be performed by a physician or an audiologist
trained in this area.
Otorhinolaryngologic diagnostic and treatment services are usually
reported using codes from the Surgery section. Special services are
reported using the otorhinolaryngologic codes from the Medicine
section. For example, a nasopharyngoscopy with endoscopy provided
during an office visit would be reported with 92511
(nasopharyngoscopy with endoscopy, the procedure) and a code from
the E/M section for the office visit (with modifier -25).
EXERCISE 26-7
Special Otorhinolaryngologic Services
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Monaural hearing aid check in ear (monaural: “mon,” one and
“aural,” ear)
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Screening test, pure tone, air only
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
A nasopharyngoscopy with endoscope due to recent bloody sputum
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
Nasal function study due to inadequate respiratory air flow
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
 
CONGRATULATIONS!
Keep up the hard work; you will soon be finished with the entire CPT
manual!
Cardiovascular
The Cardiovascular subsection is discussed in 
Chapter 17
, but there
are also some services that are reported with Medicine codes that you
have not reviewed yet. Let’s take a closer look at these services.
Coronary therapeutic services and procedures
Under this heading you will find invasive and noninvasive
cardiovascular service codes (92920-92998), such as cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) and cardioversion (changing [converting] an
abnormal heart rhythm to a normal one). Percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty (PTCA) codes 92920 and 92921 are also located
here. The femoral or brachial artery is usually accessed and a catheter
with a balloon tip is threaded up to the heart, into the coronary artery.
The balloon is inflated in the area of occlusion and the occlusive
material is pressed back, thereby widening the vessel.
Cardiography (93000-93278), Implantable and Wearable Cardiac
Device Evaluations (93279-93299), and Echocardiography (93303-
93355) were reviewed in 
Chapter 17
 of this text.
Cardiac catheterization
Codes 93451-93572 report cardiac catheterization, which is a
diagnostic medical procedure performed on the heart. Cardiac
Catheterization codes were also reviewed in 
Chapter 17
 of this text.
The right side of the heart may be accessed by entering the right
femoral vein and advancing through the inferior vena cava or
entering the basilic vein in the arm and advancing through the
superior vena cava. Right heart catheters are used to measure and
record right atrial, right ventricular, pulmonary artery, and
pulmonary capillary wedge pressures. Right-sided pressure
measurements help diagnose congestive heart failure and right-sided
valve disease.
The left side of the heart is approached through the arterial system.
Access is commonly through the right femoral artery and advancing
through the ascending aorta, the aortic valve, and into the left
ventricle. A left heart catheterization will help to diagnose coronary
artery disease, left ventricular dysfunction, and valve disease.
Fig. 26-6
 shows examples of both right and left cardiac
catheterizations.
 
 
FIGURE 26–6
Cardiac catheterization through 
A,
 the superior vena
cava, or 
B,
 the femoral artery.
Noninvasive vascular diagnostic studies
The codes in this subsection (93880-93998) report procedures that are
conducted to study veins and arteries other than the heart and great
vessels. These studies use the same devices as are used in heart and
great-vessel echocardiography, except that the divisions are based on
the location of the vein or artery being studied.
EXERCISE 26-8
Noninvasive Vascular Diagnostic Studies
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A patient is referred for a single-level, bilateral venous occlusion
plethysmography of the legs. The patient has complained of
intermittent leg claudication.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
A 34-year-old patient presents with a history of inability to sustain
an erection due to organic impotence. The physician uses a duplex
scan to conduct a complete study of the arterial and venous flow of
the penis.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Pulmonary
Codes in the Pulmonary subsection (94002-94799) report therapies,
such as nebulizer treatments, incentive spirometry (illustrated in 
Fig.
26-7
), and diagnostic tests, such as pulmonary function tests. A
nebulizer (
Figs. 26-8
, 
26-9
) is a device that produces a spray, which is
inhaled; it is used to treat patients with, for example, asthma.
Pulmonary function tests monitor the function of the pulmonary
system and examine the lung capacity of patients with, for example,
emphysema. In most cases, several pulmonary function tests are
performed together. The data are then compiled, and a diagnosis is
made. Several indicators 
must be present from a variety of tests, and
those tests must be performed many times and produce the same
result each time for the results to be considered conclusive. In most
cases, each type of test is reported separately, unless it is specifically
stated otherwise in the code description.
 
CODING SHOT
Add -26 to the code when reporting only the physician interpretation
of the test if the physician does not own the testing equipment.
 
FIGURE 26–7
Incentive spirometry is used to promote alveolar
inflation and lung capacity.
 
FIGURE 26–8
Diagrammatic illustration of Respirgard II nebulizer
system.
 
FIGURE 26–9
Patient receiving a nebulizer treatment.
EXERCISE 26-9
Pulmonary
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Pulmonary stress test, simple
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Vital capacity, total
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Bronchodilation responsiveness evaluation in the office with
spirometry before and after bronchodilator treatment. The patient
has a cough and a 20-year smoking dependence.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
 
(Answers are located in
Appendix B
)
Allergy and clinical immunology
Read the notes that appear at the beginning of the Allergy and Clinical
Immunology subsection (95004-95199). The subsection is divided into
three parts. The 
first
 is Allergy Testing, which describes allergy
testing by various methods (percutaneous, intracutaneous, inhalation)
and the type of tests (allergenic extracts, venoms, biologicals, food).
The number of tests must always be specified for reporting purposes
because for most of these codes, payment is made per test.
Allergy testing consists of the performance, evaluation, and
interpretation of allergens. The testing should be based on a complete
history and physical examination of the patient and correlated with
signs and symptoms related to the presence of possible allergy
diagnoses during allergy testing (95004-95071).
The 
second
 subheading is Ingestion Challenge Testing (95076,
95079). Code 95076 reports the initial 120 minutes of testing time and
95079 reports each additional 60 minutes.
The 
third
 subheading is Allergen Immunotherapy and the codes
specify three types of services: Injection only, prescription and
injection, provision of antigen only.
All the codes in Allergen Immunotherapy have specific notes that
you must read to know whether the code is for injection, prescription
and injection, or antigen only. For example, code 95115 reports the
injection of antigen only and does not include the extract, but code
95120 reports the prescription, extract, and injection. Careful reading
of the descriptions is a necessity.
The professional service necessary to provide the immunotherapy is
bundled into the code, so an office visit code would not usually be
reported. If the physician provided another identifiable service at the
time of the immunotherapy, an office visit may be reported. But for
the patient who has only the injection, prescription, antigen, or any
combination of these three, the codes already contain the professional
service.
Allergen Immunotherapy is the repeated administration of
allergens to patients for the purpose of providing protection against
the allergic symptoms and reactions associated with exposure to these
allergens. Immunotherapy (hyposensitization) may extend over a
period of months, usually on an increasing dosage scale. This is
followed by a build-up of tolerance to the antigen (as evidenced by the
higher doses that can be administered) and a decline in the symptoms
and medication requirements.
Indications for allergen immunotherapy are determined by
diagnostic testing appropriate to the individual needs of each patient
and his/her clinical history of allergic diseases.
EXERCISE 26-10
Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Direct nasal mucous membrane allergy test
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Percutaneous test using allergen extracts, immediate type reaction,
10 tests
CPT Code: ____________________ × ____________
3 
Single injection of allergen using extract provided by the patient.
Patient has documented allergy to ragweed.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
Physician prepares a 10-dose multi-vial allergenic extract for a
patient. At the same encounter, one dose from this vial is
administered by one injection to the patient.
CPT Codes: ____________________ ×
____________________, ____________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Endocrinology
This subsection contains only codes used to report glucose monitoring
(95250, 95251). Continuous glucose monitoring is a procedure in
which a probe is inserted subcutaneously and attached to a monitor
that is worn by the patient. The monitor records the glucose level for a
72-hour period at which time the probe is removed and the data are
downloaded from the monitor. The patient records his or her insulin
administration, meals, exercise, and any hypoglycemic events during
the monitoring period, in addition to performing the usual finger stick
glucose four times a day during the 3-day period. The service includes
the initial hookup, calibration of the monitor, patient training,
removal of sensor, printout of recording, and interpretation and
report (95251).
Neurology and neuromuscular
procedures
There are codes in the Neurology and Neuromuscular Procedures
(95782-96020) subsection for sleep testing, muscle testing
(electromyography), range of motion measurements (
Fig. 26-10
),
cerebral seizure monitoring, and a variety of neurologic function tests.
The codes in this subsection are usually reported by physicians who
specialize in neurology (neurologists). Sleep studies in newborns are
performed by pediatric pulmonologists. A neurologist usually is a
consultant to a physician who is seeking the advice and input of
another physician concerning a patient with suspected neurologic
problems.
One of the specialized tests conducted in the neurology specialty
area is sleep studies (95800-95811). 
Sleep studies
 are the monitoring
of a patient’s sleep for 6 or more hours. The studies include the tracing
(technical component) and the physician’s review, interpretation, and
report (professional component). If a physician performs only the
professional component, modifier -26 is reported.
Sleep studies diagnose various sleep disorders and measure a
patient’s response to therapy. An electroencephalogram (EEG) is a
procedure that records changes in brain waves. 
Polysomnography
(
Fig. 26-11
) is the measurement of the brain waves during sleep but
with the added feature of recording the various stages of sleep (i.e.,
excited, relaxed, drowsy, asleep, or deep sleep). During each of these
stages, the rate and amplitude (height) of the brain waves are
measured and compared with normal ranges. Certain neurologic
conditions may be identified by the degree to which brain waves vary
from normal ranges.
 
FIGURE 26–10
Range-of-motion measurements. 
A,
 Palmar flexion. 
B,
Dorsiflexion. 
C,
 Ulnar deviation. 
D,
 Radial deviation.
Nerve conduction tests (95905-95913) are usually performed in
conjunction with conventional motor nerve conduction studies of the
same nerve and may include F-wave studies. 
F-wave
 studies assess
motor nerve function along the entire extent of that nerve. An impulse
generated at the stimulating electrode travels up the motor nerves to
the motor neuron cell bodies in the spinal cord. The impulse then
travels down the same motor nerves to the neuromuscular junction,
and then to the muscle. Codes 95907-95913 are to be reported for each
nerve tested, regardless of the number of stimulation sites along the
sensory or motor nerve being tested. For a given patient, multiple
motor or sensory nerve conduction codes may be assigned if multiple
motor or sensory nerves are tested. Appendix J of the CPT manual
lists the specific nerves tested for codes 95905-95913.
Codes 95905-95913 report both sensory and motor nerve conduction
studies with or without F-wave study and includes the interpretation
and report.
Code 95905 reports motor and/or sensory nerve conduction using
preconfigured electrodes that have been customized to specific
anatomic sites.
Parameters
 are what are being measured during a sleep test. For
example, parameters include the measurement of snoring or blood
pressure. The number of parameters measured is listed in the code
description. The patient’s medical record will contain the parameters,
or measurements, recorded during the test. To report sleep tests
accurately, you must know the parameters and stages of testing.
Additionally, many codes include a time component (such as 95803);
so it is important to have the duration of the test stated in the medical
record.
Electromyographic (EMG) studies use needles and electric current
to stimulate nerves and record the results. Assessments of dysphasia,
developmental testing, neurobehavior status, and neuropsychological
test codes are also located in this subsection.
 
QUICK CHECK 26-3
1. 
According to the Sleep Testing Guidelines, polysomnography
includes sleep staging with:
a. 
EEG, EOG, EMG, ECG
b. 
Monitoring snoring, continuous blood
pressures, and body positions
c. 
ECG, Extended EEG, NCPAP
d. 
EEG, EOG, EMG
 
(Answers are located in
Appendix C
)
EXERCISE 26-11
Neurology and Neuromuscular
Procedures
Using the notes under the Sleep Testing subheading and the code
descriptions following the notes, identify the following
abbreviations:
1 
CPAP
__________________________________________________________________________________________
2 
PAT
__________________________________________________________________________________________
3 
MWT
_________________________________________________________________________________________
4 
EEG
__________________________________________________________________________________________
5 
EMG
__________________________________________________________________________________________
6 
EOG
__________________________________________________________________________________________
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
7 
Awake and drowsy EEG and photic stimulation in clinic. The
patient presents with episodes of sleep apnea.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
8 
Needle electromyography, three extremities and related paraspinal
areas. The patient complains of numbness in arms and legs.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
9 
Range-of-motion measurement and report on both legs. The patient
is experiencing muscular incoordination.
CPT Code: ____________________ × ____________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Central nervous system
assessments/tests
The Central Nervous System Assessments/Tests codes (96101-96127)
identify psychological testing, speech/language (aphasia) assessment,
developmental progress assessments, and thinking/reasoning status
examination (neurobehavioral). Except for the basic developmental
testing, the codes are defined on a per-hour basis. The results of all the
tests are to be developed into a report that is included in the patient
record.
EXERCISE 26-12
Central Nervous System
Assessments/Tests
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following (code all
cases at 60 minutes in length):
1 
A mother presented to the office of a psychiatrist with a 10-year-old
who had been referred by the child’s pediatrician for his
nonconformist conduct disturbance. At the psychiatric office visit,
the mother expressed great concern about the child’s inability to
behave as she and the child’s father believed appropriate. One week
later the psychiatrist conducted Developmental Screening Test II for
this patient. The psychiatrist then discussed the results of the test
with the mother. Code only the developmental screening.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
A young executive is referred for an 80-minute psychologist-
administered Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
test by his employer. The employer requests the testing for all
newly hired executives who will be working with highly sensitive
government documents.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
A 14-year-old is seen in the office for a 70-minute assessment of the
child’s attention span. The child is experiencing increasingly severe
episodes of lethargy. The physician conducts a clinical assessment
of the child’s cognitive function.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Health and behavior
assessment/intervention
The codes in this subsection (96150-96155) do not report preventive
medicine services, nor do they report psychiatric treatments. Instead,
these codes report assessment and/or intervention for behavioral,
emotional, social, psychological, or knowledge factors that are
affecting the patient’s health. Examples of 
assessments
 are clinical
interview, behavior observation, and questionnaires. Examples of
interventions
 are individual, group, or family sessions. All services
are based on 15-minute increments. These services are not performed
by a physician. If these services are performed by a physician they are
reported with E/M codes.
Hydration
Codes 96360 and 96361 report hydration services. The physician’s
work related to these services usually involves oversight of the
treatment plan and staff supervision. When the physician provides a
significant separately identifiable E/M service, report the service with
an appropriate E/M service reporting modifier -25. Modifier -25 must
be added to the E/M code or the service will be assumed to be related
to the physician’s service for the hydration, injection, or infusion
service.
Bundled into the hydration services are local anesthesia, placing the
intravenous line, accessing an indwelling access line/catheter/port,
flushing at the end of the infusion, and all standard supplies.
Codes 96360 and 96361 report intravenous hydration infusions that
include the 
prepackaged
 fluid and electrolytes. If other than a
prepackaged substance is used, that substance would be reported
separately. Saline is not reported separately unless given alone for
hydration. If the drugs are mixed into the saline, then only the drug is
reported and the saline is bundled into the cost of the drug and not
reported separately. Included in these hydration codes are the
physician supervision and oversight of the staff providing the service.
Code 96360 reports 31 minutes to 1 hour of intravenous infusion
hydration service and 96361, the add-on code, reports each additional
hour. You can only report 96361 if the service is at least 31 minutes
over the 1 hour that was reported with 96360. Time under 31 minutes
is not reported
.
 
TOOLBOX 26-1
Your physician provided direct supervision of an IV infusion of a 500-
cc bag of common saline solution to Carol/Carl (depending on female
or male patient). It is documented that the infusion administration
occurred from 3:20-4:00 PM (40 minutes).
Question
1.
 Because the IV infusion lasted less than 1 hour but was greater than
31 minutes, you report the service with what code(s)?
____________________________
Answers are located in
 
Appendix D
.
Therapeutic, prophylactic, and diagnostic
injections and infusions
Codes 96365-96379 report the administration of therapeutic,
prophylactic, or diagnostic intravenous infusion or injection.
Intravenous 
infusions
 are reported with 96365-96368 and are divided
based on the time and type of infusion. The initial infusion is reported
with 96365 (up to 1 hour), and each additional hour (over 30 minutes)
is reported with 96366. Sometimes one infusion is provided followed
by another infusion with a different medication (sequential infusions),
in which case the initial infusion is listed first and the 
sequential
infusion (add-on code 96367) is listed second. There are times when
more than one infusion is provided at the same time, which is a
concurrent infusion. A 
concurrent
 infusion is when there is one site
and two lines infusing at the same time. Report the initial infusion
first and then the concurrent infusion (96368).
Subcutaneous infusions are reported with codes 96369-96371. Initial
set up and first hour are reported with 96369. Each additional hour is
reported with 96370. Additional set up for a new infusion site is
reported with 96371.
To report therapeutic, prophylactic, and diagnostic 
injections
(96372-96376), the physician must be present. Note that add-on code
96376 can only be reported when the service is provided in a facility.
Therapeutic, prophylactic, and diagnostic injections are divided based
on the method used for the administration (
Fig. 26-12
). 
Subcutaneous
and 
intramuscular
 injections are reported with 96372 in addition to a
code to report the substance injected. For example, if the injection was
a subcutaneous human rabies immune globulin, report 90375 for the
substance and 96372 for the administration. The administration codes
for vaccines/toxoids are reported with 90460/90461 or 90471-90474.
Code 96372 is not used to report 
chemotherapy administration (see
96401-96549). Injections for allergen immunotherapy are reported
with 95115/95117, not with therapeutic, prophylactic, or diagnostic
injection codes. 
Intra-arterial
 (96373) and 
intravenous push
(96374/96375/96376) are reported with therapeutic, prophylactic, and
diagnostic injection codes.
FIGURE 26–11
Continuous 10-minute polysomnographic tracing in a
patient with severe obstructive sleep apnea.
Chemotherapy administration
Chemotherapy codes 96401-96549 report a variety of chemotherapy
services. The Injection and Intravenous Infusion Chemotherapy codes
(96401-96417) report subcutaneous/intramuscular, intralesional, and
intravenous chemotherapy. Intra-Arterial Chemotherapy codes
(96420-96425) report various forms of chemotherapy administered via
the arteries. Other Injection and Infusion Services codes (96440-96549)
report other types of chemotherapy, such as pleural (96440),
peritoneal via an indwelling port (96446), and central nervous system
(96450), in addition to refilling/maintenance of portable or implantable
pumps or reservoirs (96521, 96522).
There are two other sets of codes used to report chemotherapy
services: Hydration (96360-96361) and Therapeutic, Prophylactic, and
Diagnostic Injections and Infusions (96365-96379), which you learned
about earlier in this chapter. In addition to these CPT codes, Level II
HCPCS “J” codes report the substances injected or infused.
Included (not reported separately) with chemotherapy infusion or
injection codes 96401-96549 are the following:
1. 
Use of local anesthesia
2. 
IV start
3. 
Access to indwelling intravenous, subcutaneous catheter, or port
4. 
Flush at the conclusion of infusion
5. 
Standard tubing, syringes, and supplies
6. 
Preparation of the chemotherapy agent(s)
If other services are provided, they may be reported separately.
The initial intravenous infusion (the treatment) is reported with
96365 and each additional hour of infusion, up to 8 hours, is reported
with 96366. If a sequential (one after another) intravenous therapy is
provided, the service is reported with 96367. When a concurrent (at
the same time as another) intravenous therapy is provided the service
is reported with 96368. A concurrent infusion is one in which multiple
infusions are provided through the same intravenous line. A
concurrent infusion can be billed only once per patient encounter.
If more than one substance is placed in the 
one
 bag, it is considered
one
 infusate and 
one
 infusion. You would report 
one
 administration
code and a Level II HCPCS J code for each substance or drug.
Any administration that is 15 minutes or less is considered a push,
not an infusion. The administration of an initial or single intravenous
push is reported with 96374 and each additional push is reported with
96375. Report only one push per drug. For example, if a patient is
given a push of morphine 2 mg at the beginning of a service and
morphine 2 mg later in the service, bill one administration code for the
two IV pushes of morphine. The appropriate units of the J code (J2270
—morphine up to 10 mg × 1) would also be billed for the total dose.
If two drugs are mixed in the same bag and administered for 15
minutes or less, the service is reported with the appropriate push CPT
code (initial or subsequent) × 1 unit. The drug(s) or substance would
be separately reported with the appropriate J code based on the
amount and type.
A patient will often receive hydration and ancillary medications
before or after chemotherapy. Only one initial administration code can
be reported for each encounter; other services are reported with
secondary or subsequent codes.
Example
A patient presents for a chemotherapy intravenous infusion session
and is given a 40-minute hydration prior to chemotherapy reported
with 96360. If the patient receives hydration before and after
chemotherapy, calculate the entire time of hydration infusion. For
example, a patient received 1 hour of hydration before chemotherapy
infusion and 40 minutes of hydration after chemotherapy. The total
hydration time is 100 minutes. Report code 96360 for the first 31
minutes to 1 hour. Each additional hour is reported with add-on code
96361.
Modifier -59 should be reported to indicate that hydration was
provided prior to or following chemotherapy. Hydration provided at
the same time as chemotherapy to facilitate drug delivery is not
reported separately. All infusions must have a documented start and
stop time.
The patient may also receive medications before and/or after
chemotherapy, such as anti-nausea medications. These medications
are reported in addition to the chemotherapy because chemotherapy
is always the primary service. When the patient receives multiple
intravenous infusions of medications and these medications are
administered individually, each is reported separately; but if the
medications are mixed together and given in one infusion, they are
reported as one infusion.
Code 96375 is an add-on code and is only reported with another
code, such as 96413, Chemotherapy administration. The charges for
the patients in the examples that follow would list the chemotherapy
administration first, followed by the other service codes since the
chemotherapy is the primary service.
Example
After chemotherapy, a patient received Aloxi (J2469), Benadryl
(J1200), and Decadron (J1100) in three separate infusions of less than
15 minutes (pushes). The J codes are reported along with 96375 × 3.
If the medications are all mixed together and administered in one
infusion of less than 15 minutes, the J codes are reported along with
96375 × 1.
Example
A patient presents for chemotherapy and receives two pushes, one of
Aloxi, 0.25 mg, and one of Benadryl, 50 mg. Chemotherapy with
Rituximab, 100 mg, is administered for 3 hours by means of an
intravenous infusion. After therapy, the patient is administered
Decadron, 1 mg, by intravenous push. The services are reported as
follows:
Pre- and post-medications: 96375 × 3 (three total IV pushes); J2469
(Aloxi) × 10 units; J1200 (Benadryl) × 1 unit; and J1100 (Decadron) × 1
unit. NOTE: 1 unit of Aloxi = 25 mcg; therefore, 0.25 mg = 250 mcg =
10 units.
Chemotherapy: 96413 (initial hour); 96415 × 2 (2 additional hours);
J9310 × 1 (Rituximab). Chemotherapy is the initial infusion and the
hydration and pushes are secondary/subsequent.
If a significant identifiable office visit service was provided in
addition to the chemotherapy administration, report that service with
an E/M code, adding -25 to indicate the service was separate and
significant.
 
CODING SHOT
Chemotherapy administration codes (96549-96459) include the use of
local anesthesia, initiating the intravenous therapy, access to an
indwelling port, flush at conclusion, tubing/supplies/syringes, and
preparation of the chemotherapy agent(s). These services are not
reported separately.
EXERCISE 26-13
Chemotherapy Administration
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code only the chemotherapy
administration:
1 
Chemotherapy injected into the pleural cavity with thoracentesis.
The patient has documented primary cancer of the lungs.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Refilling and maintenance of a patient’s portable pump. The patient
has primary adenocarcinoma of the colon.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
3 
Chemotherapy administered subcutaneously with local anesthesia.
The patient has melanoma of the chest wall.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
4 
Chemotherapy administered intravenously using the infusion
technique for 50 minutes. The patient has breast cancer with
metastasis (secondary site) to the bone of the spinal column.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
5 
Chemotherapy injected into the central nervous system using a
lumbar puncture. Patient has cancer of the brain, primary.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
6 
An established patient is seen in the office for pernicious anemia.
The nurse administers an injection of vitamin B
12
, 900 mcg with
direct physician supervision. Report the substance with a HCPCS
Level II code. The service was not significant enough to report a
separate E/M code for the office visit.
CPT Codes: ____________________ (therapeutic
injection), ____________________ (substance
HCPCS code)
 
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Photodynamic therapy
The photodynamic therapy services (96567, 96571) are add-on codes
reported in conjunction with the bronchoscopy or endoscopy services.
An agent is injected into the patient that remains in cancerous cells
longer than in the normal cells. After the agent has dissipated from
the normal cells, the patient is exposed to laser light. The agent
absorbs the light and the light produces oxygen, destroying the
cancerous cells.
Codes for endoscopic application are divided on the basis of time—
the first 30 minutes and each additional 15 minutes. External
application of light (96567) is based on each exposure session.
Special dermatological procedures
The dermatology codes (96900-96999) are usually reported by a
dermatologist who provides services to a patient in an office on a
consultation basis. The dermatology codes for special procedures
would typically be reported in addition to an E/M code, for example,
if a patient is referred by his family physician to a dermatologist for
treatment of acne. The dermatologist conducts a history and
examination and treats the patient with ultraviolet light
(actinotherapy). The reporting would be an Office or Other Outpatient
code, depending on the level of service provided, and 96900 to report
the actinotherapy.
EXERCISE 26-14
Special Dermatological Procedures
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
A 16-year-old patient sees a dermatologist in consultation, at which
time the physician does a problem focused history and physical
examination regarding the patient’s acne vulgaris. The physician
prescribes and provides a treatment of ultraviolet light therapy.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Photochemotherapy is provided for a 34-year-old consultative
patient with severe bullous dermatosis. The patient receives 8 hours
of treatment. The physician provides a comprehensive history and
physical examination with moderately complex medical decision
making.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
From the Trenches
 
 
“Having good working relationships with physicians is the #1 priority. You
need to be confident that what you are telling them is correct, and when they
realize that you know what you are talking about, they will respect you.”
STEPHANIE
Physical medicine and rehabilitation
The codes in the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation subsection
(97010-97799) are reported by a physician or therapist. The subsection
includes codes for different modalities of treatments (e.g., traction,
whirlpool, electrical stimulation) as well as various types of patient
training (e.g., functional activities, gait training, massage). The codes
are reported on the basis of time or treatment area, as stated in the
description of the code. Codes are divided by supervision or constant
attendance. Unit coding (i.e., ×2, ×3) is necessary if the time spent
administering the treatment exceeds the time listed in the code.
Example
Reporting for patient’s prosthetic training of 60 minutes would be:
97761 × 4  Prosthetic training, each 15 minutes
 
CODING SHOT
An 
orthotic
 is a support, splint, or brace used to align a body part,
such as an elbow brace (L3702-L3766). A 
prosthetic
 is a replacement,
such as a breast prosthesis (L8000-L8039).
All services provided by independent physical therapists and
occupational therapists require a written referral from a physician that
includes documentation of the disease or injury being treated and the
diagnosis.
The services are rendered according to a written treatment plan
determined by the provider after an appropriate assessment of the
illness or injury. All providers rendering therapy must document the
appropriate history, examination, diagnosis, related physician orders,
therapy goals and potential for achievement, any contraindications,
functional assessment, type of treatment, the body areas to be treated,
the date that therapy initiated, and expected frequency and duration
of treatments. This documentation must be maintained in the patient’s
medical record.
Documentation should indicate the prognosis for restoration of
function and the medical necessity of the treatment.
Physical therapy test and measurement codes are listed by the type
of testing and the time the testing requires. The type of test would be
such as functional capacity. Note the use of type and time in the
following CPT code.
Example
97750   Physical performance test or measurement (e.g.,
musculoskeletal, functional capacity, with written report, each 15
minutes)
 
CODING SHOT
For all codes that are time based, the time must be documented in the
patient’s medical record.
The codes in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation are reported for
physical medicine and therapy as well as for other rehabilitation, for
example, community/work reintegration (97537).
Active wound care management
Nonphysician personnel perform the procedures described in Active
Wound Care Management codes (97597-97610). Codes 97597 and
97598 report selective debridement services by means of high pressure
waterjets, scissors, scalpels, or forceps based on the first 20 sq cm or
less (97597) and each additional 20 sq cm or part thereof (97598). The
codes are not reported with or to replace the surgical debridement
represented by 11042-11047. If a physician performed the procedures,
the services would be reported with the 11042-11047 codes.
Wound management codes are based on nonselective or negative
pressure procedures. 
Nonselective
 debridement is that in which
healthy tissue is removed along with necrotic tissue. The tissue is
gradually loosened with water (hydrotherapy). Loosened tissue may
be cut away with sharp instruments. Nonselective debridement is
usually done over the course of several visits.
Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (NPWT, 97605, 97606), as
illustrated in 
Figs. 26-13
 and 
26-14
, may include vacuuming the
drainage and tissue from the wound area, application of topical
medications or ointments, assessment of the wound, and directions to
the patient for continued care of the wound. Choice of codes is
dependent on the square centimeters treated.
EXERCISE 26-15
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following:
1 
Application of cold packs to one area (modality)
CPT Code: ____________________
 
FIGURE 26–13
Silverlon® Negative Pressure Wound Therapy
dressing.
FIGURE 26–12
Injection methods. 
A,
 Subcutaneous (SC). 
B,
Intramuscular (IM). 
C,
 Intravenous (IV). 
D,
 Intra-arterial.
 
FIGURE 26–14
Negative pressure-assisted wound closure sponge in
place on patient’s abdomen.
2 
Initial prosthetic training, 30 minutes
CPT Code: ____________________ × ______
3 
Physical medicine treatment procedure, gait training, 30 minutes.
Patient status is post-acute Cerebrovascular Accident.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Medical nutrition therapy
These codes (97802-97804) are reported by non-physician personnel
for medical nutritional therapy assessment (NTA) or intervention. If a
physician provides the service, the service is reported using E/M
codes or Preventive Medicine codes.
The codes report face-to-face services with the patient based on time
of 15 minutes for initial or re-assessments and 30 minutes for group
assessments. The provider would review the patient’s medical record,
including the history of present illness and past medical history, along
with pertinent laboratory data. The nutritional history would be
obtained from the patient and an appropriate examination would be
conducted. Documentation would indicate the nutritional assessment
and prescription recommended to the patient and this information
would be communicated to the health care provider.
Osteopathic manipulative treatment
(OMT)
Osteopathic manipulative treatment (98925-98929) is a form of manual
treatment applied by a physician to eliminate or alleviate somatic
(body) dysfunction and related disorders. The codes are listed
according to body regions. These body regions are the head; cervical,
thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and pelvic regions; lower extremities; upper
extremities; rib cage; abdomen and viscera region. Codes are
separated on the basis of the number of body regions treated. These
codes are usually reported by osteopathic physicians (doctors of
osteopathy, DO).
Chiropractic manipulative treatment
(CMT)
The Chiropractic Manipulative Treatment subsection (98940-98943) is
divided by the number of regions manipulated. For this subsection,
the 
spine
 is divided into five regions (cervical, thoracic, lumbar,
sacral, and pelvic), and the 
extraspinal
 regions are divided into five
regions (head, lower extremities, upper extremities, rib cage, and
abdomen). Chiropractic manipulation is the manipulation of the
spinal column and other structures. Each of the codes in the
Chiropractic Manipulative Treatment subsection has a professional
assessment bundled into the code. An office visit code is reported only
if the patient had a significant separately identifiable service provided;
otherwise, the service of the office visit is bundled into the code.
EXERCISE 26-16
Manipulative Treatment
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following
therapies:
1 
Sally, a 43-year-old woman, presents with the complaint of a seizing
pain in the area of her lower left hip. The chiropractor conducts an
assessment of the patient and provides a chiropractic alignment to
two spinal regions.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
2 
Osteopathic lumbar manipulation (OMT), one region. Patient has
chronic low back pain.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Non-face-to-face nonphysician services
This subsection is divided into Telephone Services (98966-98968) and
On-Line Medical Evaluation (98969) services provided by qualified
health care professionals. The notes and the code descriptions for
these codes indicate that the telephone or online service cannot
originate from a related assessment that was provided within the
previous 7 days or result in an appointment within the next 24 hours
or the soonest available appointment. The telephone services are
reported based on the documented time, and the online service is per
incident.
Special services, procedures, and
reports
Special Services, Procedures, and Reports (99000-99091) is a
miscellaneous subsection that includes codes for services that are not
reported with codes from other sections. The codes report services
that are, for example, rendered at unusual hours of the day or on
holidays. These codes are considered adjunct codes and are to be
reported in addition to the codes for the major service. For example, if
a physician goes to the office on a Sunday to meet an established
patient and provide urgent, but not emergency, service, the E/M
service code for the office visit would be reported in addition to 99050
to indicate the unusual time at which the service was provided.
An often reported code is 99024 for an office visit provided during a
global period. Third-party payers do not reimburse for the submission
of this code; however, it communicates that the service was provided
to the patient during the follow-period of a previous surgical
procedure.
You have assigned 99070, supplies, from this subsection before. One
of the big advantages of the HCPCS coding system is that you
specifically identify the supply reported rather than the more general
99070. For example, you may report 99070 for a body sock for a
patient. With the HCPCS coding system, you can specify the body
sock with a code L0984. It is best to use HCPCS codes when reporting
supplies since most third-party payers will request additional
information when 99070 is submitted.
The subsection also contains codes for medical testimony, the
completion of complicated reports, education services, unusual travel,
and supplies. Although this subsection is small, it contains codes that
are reported often. Take a few minutes to become familiar with the
codes listed within Special Services, Procedures, and Reports and
mark the subsection for future use.
The codes for Special Services are located in the CPT manual index
under the main term “Special Services.”
EXERCISE 26-17
Special Services, Procedures, and Reports
Using the CPT manual, code the following:
1 
What medicine code is reported in addition to the basic service code
when a service is provided after hours on Monday?
CPT Code: ____________________
2 
Conveyance of a specimen from the physician’s office to a laboratory
CPT Code: ____________________
3 
Supplies provided for an office visit exceeding those usually used
CPT Code: ____________________
 
(Answers are
located in
 
Appendix B
)
Qualifying circumstances for anesthesia. 
Anesthesia is discussed in 
Chapter 12
.
Moderate sedation. 
Sedation reported with 99151-99157 is discussed in 
Chapter 12
.
Other services and procedures
A wide variety of codes (99170-99199) is located in this subsection of
the Medicine section. For example, you will find codes for anogenital
examination with a colposcope of a child in a case of suspected
trauma, visual function screenings, pumping poison from the
stomach, and therapeutic phlebotomy treatments. Because the codes
are so varied, the way in which they are divided is also varied. For
example, the code range 99190-99192 is divided on the basis of time,
whereas other codes are divided according to the extent of the service.
Home health procedures/services
These codes (99500-99602) report non-physician services provided at
the patient’s residence. The residence may be an assisted living
apartment, custodial care facility, group home, or other nontraditional
residence. The codes are divided based on the reason for the service
(e.g., injection, hemodialysis).
Home infusion procedures services
The codes 99601 and 99602 represent services of administration of a
variety of therapies (e.g., nutrition, chemotherapy, pain management).
The services are provided by non-physician allied health
professionals. Codes are divided based on the time spent providing
the infusion.
Medication therapy management
services
These codes (99605-99607) are for patient assessments and
interventions by a pharmacist, upon request. These codes do not
describe the product-specific information that a pharmacist would
ordinarily provide to a patient regarding a medication; but rather to
assist in the management of treatment-related medication
complications or interactions. The codes are reported by the
pharmacist based on the patient status (new or established) and the
time spent in assessment and intervention.
Chapter Review
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 26, learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 In the Medicine section of the CPT manual, what code describes
supplies and materials? ___________________________
2 Psychotherapy services are
______________________________________
______________________________________.
3 What is the treatment technique in which people are trained to
improve their health by using signals from their own bodies?
___________________________________________________________________________________________
4 What dialysis technique uses the peritoneal cavity as a filter?
_________________________________________________
5 Gastroparesis, also referred to as gastric stasis, is a common
gastrointestinal ______________________________ disorder.
6 Codes in the General Ophthalmological Services subheading
describing new or established patient are based on two levels. What
are the levels described in each code(s)?
______________________________ _______________________________
7 What diagnostic cardiovascular procedure approaches the left side
of the heart through the arterial system? ____________
8 What common office test is used to assess how well your lungs work
by measuring how much air you inhale, how much you exhale, and
how quickly you exhale?
_________________________________________________________________
9 What is the procedure term for repeated administration of allergens
to provide protection against allergic symptoms?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
10 What subsection in the Medicine section describes codes to report
glucose monitoring? ____________________________
11 What procedure describes the measurement of the brain waves
during sleep? _____________________________________
12 ________________ is a communication disorder that results from
damage to the parts of the brain that contain language.
13 Chemotherapy administration lasts 10 minutes. Is this considered
an infusion or a push? ___________________________
14 What code category can also be reported with special
dermatological procedures? _________________________________
15 Physical therapy test and measurement codes are listed by specific
criteria. What is the listing by code(s)? ______________
16 Active wound care management codes describe services performed
by _________________________________ personnel.
17 OMT treatment codes are listed by
____________________________________
____________________________________.
18 On-line medical evaluation services are considered what type of
service by nonphysicians? _________________________
19 When a service is rendered on a holiday, it is considered a(n)
____________________________________________ code.
20 What provider would use the medication therapy management
service codes? ____________________________________
Chapter 26, part I, theory
Without the use of the CPT manual, answer the following questions:
1 There are two types of services in the Medicine section. One is
diagnostic and the other is ___________________________.
2 What do the following abbreviations mean?
a IV ____________________
b IM ____________________
c SC ____________________
3 The routing of blood, including the waste products, outside of the
body for cleansing is ____________________.
4 The dialysis that involves using a cavity as a filter is known as what
kind of dialysis? ____________________
5 What is the name of the test that checks the intraocular pressure of
the eye? ____________________
6 What is the name of the scope that is used to examine color vision?
____________________
7 What is the word that means the body of knowledge about the ear,
nose, and larynx? _____________________________________________
8 In what subsection of the Medicine section would you find CPR,
coronary atherectomies, and heart valvuloplasties?
____________________
9 What kind of scanning uses ultrasonic technology with a display of
both structure and motion with time? ____________________ (two
words)
10 What is the name of the ultrasonic documentation that records
velocity mapping and imaging? ____________________
11 In what Medicine subsection would you find therapies such as
nebulizer treatments? ____________________
12 Percutaneous, intracutaneous, and inhalation are examples of what
from the Allergy subsection? _____________ (of tests)
13 Allergenic extracts, venoms, biologicals, and food are examples of
what from the Allergy subsection? ____________________ (of tests)
14 If you were looking for the code number to indicate the
circumstance in which a physician sees a patient between the hours of
10 PM and 8 AM, in what subsection of the Medicine section would
you find that code?
_____________________________________________
Chapter 26, part II, practical
Using the CPT and ICD-10-CM manuals, code the following (Separate
multiple codes with a comma and then a space in your response. XXXXX,
XXXXX. Make sure to include a dash in front of your modifier answers.
XXXXX-XX. Make sure to indicate units with an x and spaces. XXXXX x
X):
15 An 18-month-old established patient receives a DT that is
administered intramuscularly by the physician, after the physician
counseled the parents on the vaccine.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________, ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
16 A 30-year-old established patient receives a tetanus toxoid that is
administered intramuscularly by the physician’s assistant.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
17 A DTaP and an oral poliomyelitis vaccine (live) are administered to
a new 5-year-old patient. A problem focused history and examination
are performed for an acute URI, and the medical decision making is
straightforward (separate identifiable service).
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________, ____________________,
____________________, ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
18 An established, 70-year-old Medicare patient presents to the nurse
for a pneumonia (Polysaccharide 23-Valent) and a trivalent flu
immunization, 0.5 mL (2 injections).
 CPT Code(s): ____________________
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
19 A patient brings his allergy medication into the office, and a single
injection service is provided by the nurse. The patient is allergic to
primrose.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
20 A patient receives the initial 30-minute training for her prosthetic
arm. Patient has a congenital absence of forearm and hand.
CPT Code: ____________________ × ____________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
21 The patient presents for a bronchospasm evaluation before and
after a spirometry that is administered to monitor his lung capacity.
The patient has episodes of shortness of breath.
CPT Codes: ____________________,
____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
22 Nasopharyngoscopy with endoscope. The patient has persistent
nosebleeds.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
23 A 30-year-old with end-stage renal disease receives a full month of
dialysis with eight encounters.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
24 Ophthalmology Clinic Progress Note
Today, I saw a new patient who is a 46-year-old
white female who was diagnosed with Graves’,
toxic diffuse goiter, early last year. She had
some swelling of the eyes and was originally
told she had an allergy; then the same person,
after he found out she had Graves’, put her on
prednisone. It was unknown what the dose
was, but the patient showed me her bottles and
it is obvious that she was on 20 mg a day, taken
at suppertime. She has now come down from
this. She was also on prednisone acetate eye
drops. The patient denies any history of any
problems except that she became quite
depressed and her head felt funny on the
steroids. The patient had a history of an ulcer
problem in the past, which was treated with
diet. The patient allegedly had a positive
Mantoux test years ago, but her chest x-rays
have always been negative.
Today when I saw her, she was 20/80 in the right
and 20/40 in the left with her refraction. The lids
are markedly swollen, and she has marked
inferior ptosis from the sagging lids, the water
collection, and the redness. There is marked
chemosis of the conjunctivae and thickening of
the lids. The patient has full extraocular
motility, except she cannot converge. There is
marked swelling of the globes on the
retropulsion exam. The pressures are 21 and 20
in primary gaze and 30 and 24 in up gaze. The
discs are flat. The patient has pseudoexfoliation
in the right eye and nuclear sclerotic cataracts in
both eyes, right greater than left.
I counseled the patient about the treatment of this
and offered her radiation therapy along with
the proper dose of steroids of 100 mg a day for
a week and then taper down from the 100 mg. I
will send her to see Dr. Zapata for consultation
radiation therapy, and then I think we would
see her weekly as we get this problem under
control. I did not feel she needed any topical
medication, and she definitely does not need
surgery now since there is no proptosis at this
time. We will see her again in 1 week. I
counseled her about the side effects of the high
dose of steroids and how to take them.
CPT Code: ____________________
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________, ________________,
________________, ________________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
UNIT 4
Inpatient Coding
OUTLINE
27.  Inpatient coding
CHAPTER 27
Inpatient coding
“A good coder has to be able to work independently and like to solve
puzzles, while sometimes a coder will have to figure out which parts of
the puzzle are missing and clarify with the physician. Coding is even
more rewarding when you know that you can positively impact a
facility’s bottom line by doing a great job.”
Karla R. Lovaasen, RHIA, CCS, CCS-P
Coding and Consulting Services
 
Abingdon, Maryland
CHAPTER TOPICS
Differences between Inpatient and Outpatient Coding​​
Selection of Principal Diagnosis​​
Reporting Additional Diagnoses​​
Present on Admission (POA)​​
Development of the ICD-10-PCS​​
Chapter Review​​
Learning objectives
After completing this chapter you should be able to
1 
Explain the differences between inpatient and outpatient coding.
2 
Define principal diagnosis and procedure.
3 
Examine the 
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting
.
4 
Review the Guidelines for Selection of a Principal Diagnosis.
5 
Determine when a condition should be reported as an additional
diagnosis.
6 
Explain the purpose of the present on admission indicators.
7 
Examine the ICD-10-PCS system.
Karla R. Lovaasen, RHIA, CCS, CCS-P
Author:
 ICD-10-CM/PCS Coding: Theory and Practice, 2017 Edition
(St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier)
 
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
Differences between inpatient and
outpatient coding
Our studies until now have focused on physician services and how to
report these services. This chapter will review coding for hospital
services.
For physicians, payment is based on specific services and supplies
reported with CPT and HCPCS codes. The medical necessity of the
services and supplies is reported with diagnostic codes. As a result,
many coders and physicians call CPT and HCPCS codes the “money
codes.” Physician services are often referred to as “professional”
services because they are performed by individuals. Physician services
can be performed in many places, including hospitals.
Because the services provided by hospitals are broader than those
provided by physicians, hospitals are reimbursed differently than
physicians. The hospital is paid for its “hospitality,” ensuring the
patient is housed, fed, and nurtured back to health until the patient is
discharged. The length of stay and intensity of services provided to
the patient in a hospital vary according to the patient’s condition. For
example, a young woman admitted to the hospital for a normal,
uncomplicated birth usually requires much less nursing care and
recovery time than an elderly patient admitted for multiple organ
failure in sepsis. The physicians are still paid using CPT/HCPCS codes
to report services. Hospitals, however, are paid for their “hospitality”
using a complex formula (MS-DRG) based on the severity of the
patient’s illness, the patient’s other health conditions, patient age, and
whether the patient required an operating room during the stay. For
hospitals, the diagnosis is the key in determining the resources
required by a patient. For hospitals, diagnostic codes are the “money
codes.”
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Introduction (paragraph 3)
These guidelines are a set of rules that have been developed to
accompany and complement the official conventions and instructions
provided within the ICD-10-CM itself. The instructions and
conventions of the classification take precedence over guidelines.
These guidelines are based on the coding and sequencing instructions
in the Tabular List and Alphabetic Index of ICD-10-CM, but provide
additional instruction. Adherence to these guidelines when assigning
ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes is required under the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). The diagnosis codes
(Tabular List and Alphabetic Index) have been adopted under
HIPAA for all healthcare settings. A joint effort between the
healthcare provider and the coder is essential to achieve complete
and accurate documentation, code assignment, and reporting of
diagnoses and procedures. These guidelines have been developed to
assist both the healthcare provider and the coder in identifying those
diagnoses that are to be reported. The importance of consistent,
complete documentation in the medical record cannot be
overemphasized. Without such documentation accurate coding
cannot be achieved. The entire record should be reviewed to
determine the specific reason for the encounter and the conditions
treated.
The accuracy of the MS-DRG (Medical Severity Diagnosis Related
Group) is dependent on coders following the Guidelines for inpatient
coding very precisely. For physicians, the first-listed diagnostic code
indicates the reason for the encounter and the diagnostic code has a
support role because CPT/HCPCS provides the “money code.” For
inpatient coding, the reason for the hospitalization, termed the
principal diagnosis,
 is crucial to the MS-DRG formula. The principal
diagnosis is the first-listed code.
Sequencing of diagnostic codes is more crucial to reimbursement for
hospitals, and the rules for diagnostic coding also differ. For example,
a patient is admitted to the hospital experiencing severe chest pain
and sweating, to rule out myocardial infarction. The patient requires
36 hours in the hospital to undergo intense diagnostics to determine
the cause of the chest pain. Ultimately the patient is diagnosed with
anxiety and heartburn. During the hospitalization, resources
expended on this patient are identical to resources for a patient with a
myocardial infarct. Therefore, the hospital would report the “rule-
out” diagnosis, MI, as the principal diagnosis.
In an inpatient setting, you must be familiar with the inpatient
Guidelines so that the coding leads to the correct MS-DRG. Coders do
not need to know the formulas for MS-DRGs. A computer program, a
grouper, assigns the MS-DRG based on the ICD-10 codes.
Many hospitalizations are medical in nature (uncontrolled diabetes,
pneumonia) while others are surgical in nature (mastectomy, total hip
replacement). Procedure codes are used to report operating room
utilization. Procedure codes contribute to the MS-DRG formula.
ICD-10-PCS is the inpatient procedural coding system.
In the inpatient setting, ICD-10-PCS are assigned instead of CPT or
HCPCS codes. Procedure codes need to be sequenced properly with
the principal procedure as the first-listed procedure. The 
principal
procedure
 is one that is performed for definitive treatment rather than
for diagnostic or exploratory purposes, or one necessary for a
complication. If two procedures appear to meet this definition, then
the one most closely related to the principal diagnosis should be
assigned as the principal procedure. A procedure is considered to be
significant if it:
■
 
Is surgical in nature
■
 
Carries a procedural risk
■
 
Carries an anesthetic risk
■
 
Requires specialized training to perform
For a procedure to be significant it does not have to be performed in
the operating room. Many procedures are performed in the
emergency department, at a patient’s bedside, treatment room, or in
an interventional radiology department. Any procedure that affects
reimbursement should be coded and reported. Most facilities will
have a policy regarding what procedures should be coded.
Selection of principal diagnosis
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. selection of principal diagnosis
The circumstances of inpatient admission always govern the selection
of principal diagnosis. The principal diagnosis is defined in the
Uniform Hospital Discharge Data Set (UHDDS) as “that condition
established after study to be chiefly responsible for occasioning the
admission of the patient to the hospital for care.”
The UHDDS definitions are used by hospitals to report inpatient
data elements in a standardized manner. These data elements and
their definitions can be found in the July 31, 1985, Federal Register
(Vol. 50, No, 147), pp. 31038-40.
Since that time the application of the UHDDS definitions has been
expanded to include all non-outpatient settings (acute care, short
term, long term care and psychiatric hospitals; home health agencies;
rehab facilities; nursing homes, etc). 
The UHDDS definitions also
apply to hospice services (all levels of care).
In determining principal diagnosis, coding conventions in the ICD-
10-CM, the Tabular List and Alphabetic Index take precedence over
these official coding guidelines. 
(See Section I.A., Conventions for the
ICD-10-CM)
The importance of consistent, complete documentation in the
medical record cannot be overemphasized. Without such
documentation the application of all coding guidelines is a difficult, if
not impossible, task.
The 
principal
 diagnosis is sequenced 
first
 in inpatient coding. In an
outpatient setting, the term first-listed condition is used in lieu of the
term principal diagnosis and is used to indicate the main reason for
the visit. Additional diagnoses may be necessary in order to
substantiate adjunct services (such as laboratory and radiology). The
terminology “principal diagnosis” refers only to an acute care setting
and is used in conjunction with the MS-DRG payment scheme; “first-
listed diagnosis” refers only to outpatient settings. There are specific
guidelines that assist with the selection of the principal diagnosis.
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. B. Two or more interrelated conditions, each
potentially meeting the definition for principal diagnosis
When there are two or more interrelated conditions (such as diseases
in the same ICD-10-CM chapter or manifestations characteristically
associated with a certain disease) potentially meeting the definition of
principal diagnosis, either condition may be sequenced first, unless
the circumstances of the admission, the therapy provided, the Tabular
List, or the Alphabetic Index indicate otherwise.
Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. A. codes for symptoms, signs, and ill-defined
conditions
Codes for symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions from 
Chapter
18
 are not to be used as a principal diagnosis when a related
definitive diagnosis has been established.
EXERCISE 27-1
Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-Defined
Conditions
1 
A 63-year-old male is admitted with chest pain. Cardiac enzyme
levels are elevated and the ECG indicates an acute myocardial
infarction. The principal diagnosis is acute myocardial infarction.
Chest pain is not coded, because it is a symptom of the definitive
diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction.
Let’s code this case together.
a 
For an acute myocardial infarction, infarction is the 
manifestation.
“Acute” indicates the 
episode
 of care and “myocardial” indicates
the general 
site
 of the infarction.
b 
Locate the term “Infarct, infarction” in the Index.
c 
Under the term “Infarct, infarction” locate the subterm
“myocardium.” Note after “myocardium, myocardial” you find
“(acute...)” and are directed to code I21.3. You can never stop at the
Index. You must always refer to the Tabular; otherwise you will
miss important notes, such as “additional character(s) required.”
d 
Now turn to I21.3 in the Tabular.
e 
Under “I21.3 Unspecified site” there are no additional notations
required.
f 
The complete, correct code is I21.3.
Now you try one.
2 
A patient is admitted to the hospital with severe flank pain and
hematuria. A urinalysis is done and it is positive for 
Escherichia coli.
The discharge summary states acute pyelonephritis due to 
E. coli
.
a 
What is the principal diagnosis?
___________________
b 
Locate the principal diagnosis in the Index.
What code does the Index direct you to locate?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
Was there a mention of a lesion in the case
above?
__________________________________________
d 
What is the correct principal code for this case?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
e 
Why do you think “severe flank pain and
hematuria” are noted on this patient’s case?
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Two or more interrelated conditions
EXERCISE 27-2
Two or More Interrelated Conditions
1 
A patient is admitted with chest pain, shortness of breath, and a
heart murmur. The patient undergoes a diagnostic cardiac
catheterization, which shows two-vessel coronary artery disease
(native coronary arteries) and severe mitral (valve) stenosis. It is
recommended that bypass surgery with mitral valve replacement be
performed as soon as possible.
The patient has two conditions, each of which has the potential to
be the principal diagnosis: mitral valve stenosis and coronary artery
disease.
a 
Locate stenosis in the Index: both “mitral” and “valve” indicate the
site of the stenosis the patient has—the condition is stenosis. Under
the main term “Stenosis,” locate the subterm “mitral.” The words in
parentheses indicate the kinds of mitral stenosis, such as chronic,
valve, or inactive. You are looking for valve, so the correct four-
character subcategory code for the mitral valve stenosis is likely to
be I05.0.
b 
Locate coronary artery disease by locating the main term “Disease”
and the subterms “artery” and “coronary.” The entry directs you to
“
see
 Arteriosclerosis, coronary.” Under the main term
“Arteriosclerosis” and the subterm “coronary (artery)” you will be
directed to code I25.10. If the Tabular validates codes I05.0 (mitral
valve stenosis) and I25.10 (coronary artery disease, native artery),
either code could be sequenced first because none of the
information indicates one condition warranted more care than the
other.
Now you do one.
2 
A patient is involved in a car accident and is admitted with an open
fracture of the right humerus and an open fracture of the right distal
femur. Both fractures require open reduction, which means that the
fracture will be repaired using an open incision into the fracture
site.
a 
What are the two diagnoses?
______________________________________________________________
Either of these diagnoses may be principal, because both are
addressed and plans are made to treat both surgically. They were
equally the reason for admission to the hospital.
b 
Under what main term in the Index would you locate both
diagnoses? _______________________
c 
After the main term “Fracture,” what would be the first applicable
subterm for the fracture of the right humerus?
__________________________________________________________________________
d 
In the Tabular, under S42, what 7th character would you report for
an initial open fracture? ___________________________
Because the patient’s case states “open,” you know that S42.301A is
not the correct code because S42.301A specifies “closed.” Applying
the correct 7th character for initial open fracture, what is the correct
code?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
e 
In the Tabular, does the code you chose in the Index match the
description and if it does, why?
_________________________________________________________________________________________
You still have to locate the code for the open fracture of the distal
femur.
f 
After looking in the Index using the main term “Fracture,” what is
the subterm you would locate? ____________________________
g 
What is the next subterm? ____________________________
h 
What does this subterm direct you to do?
____________________________
i 
When you take the subterm direction, what code is listed?
____________________
Note: If “open” or “closed” fracture is not stated, assume it is a
“closed” fracture.
j 
After checking the Tabular, what is the correct code for the initial
fracture of the lower end of the right femur?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Two or more diagnoses
If two or more diagnoses are equally responsible for the outpatient
visit, either can be sequenced as the principal diagnosis. The same is
applicable in the inpatient setting.
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. C. Two or more diagnoses that equally meet the
definition for principal diagnosis
In the unusual instance when two or more diagnoses equally meet the
criteria for principal diagnosis as determined by the circumstances of
admission, diagnostic workup and/or therapy provided, and the
Alphabetic Index, Tabular List, or another coding guidelines does not
provide sequencing direction, any one of the diagnoses may be
sequenced first.
EXERCISE 27-3
Two or More Diagnoses
1 
A patient is admitted with weakness, diarrhea of 2 days’ duration,
diaphoresis, and abdominal pain. The attending physician lists the
diagnoses as viral gastroenteritis and dehydration. Intravenous
fluids with electrolyte supplements are ordered.
a 
Locate “Gastroenteritis” as the main term in the
Index and then the subterm “viral.” When you
do this you will be directed to code A08.4
(NEC) because the record does not specify the
organism type.
b 
Locate code A08.4 in the Tabular and make sure
it is the correct code.
c 
The correct code is A08.4. Now you need to code
the other diagnosis of dehydration.
“Dehydration” is the main term. Dehydration
appears in the Index, and the note does not
indicate “hypertonic” or “hypotonic.” Check
out the code E86.0 in the Tabular.
d 
The Tabular confirms that E86.0 is for
dehydration and there is no note regarding any
Excludes
 that concern this case. The correct code
is E86.0.
e 
Remember, when two equally important
diagnoses are indicated, it does not matter
which code is sequenced first. So, the two codes
for this case can be stated as A08.4 and E86.0 
or
E86.0 and A08.4. The order of the codes may
not seem too earth-shattering right now, but the
order of the codes is significant. One of these
diagnoses may be reimbursed at a higher rate
than the other; therefore, selection of the
principal diagnosis is critically important.
Now you have the opportunity to do the next case.
2 
A patient was admitted with heavy menstrual bleeding of 2 days’
duration, severe abdominal pain, and anemia due to acute blood
loss. The patient was given medication intravenously to control the
pain and bleeding. She also received two units of packed cells for
the anemia. Investigations were performed to determine a cause of
the heavy bleeding.
a 
What is the medical term for heavy
menstrual/uterine bleeding?
____________________________
b 
The medical term from the question above is
one of the diagnoses that you will need to
locate. What code does the Index indicate and
the Tabular of the text confirm as a code for the
first diagnosis?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
What is the second diagnosis?
____________________________
d 
Locate the second diagnosis code and confirm
your finding in the Tabular. (Hint: The
subterms for the second code are “blood loss”
and “acute.”) What is the code?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Comparative or contrasting conditions
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. D. Two or more comparative or contrasting
conditions.
In those rare instances when two or more contrasting or comparative
diagnoses are documented as “either/or” (or similar terminology),
they are coded as if the diagnoses were confirmed and the diagnoses
are sequenced according to the circumstances of the admission. If no
further determination can be made as to which diagnosis should be
principal, either diagnosis may be sequenced first.
EXERCISE 27-4
Comparative or Contrasting Conditions
1 
A patient is admitted to the hospital with chest pain, nausea, and
dyspnea. The patient has a history of a prior myocardial infarction 2
years earlier. The pain is atypical (irregular). An ECG and cardiac
enzyme study (creatine phosphokinase) are ordered, as well as an
upper gastrointestinal series to rule out esophageal reflux. The
admitting diagnosis by the attending physician is unstable angina
or esophageal reflux.
a 
Angina is located by the main term “Angina”
and the subterm “unstable.” The correct code is
I20.0.
b 
The second diagnosis is reflux, esophageal,
located in the Index under the main term
“Reflux” and the subterm “esophageal.” You
are directed to code K21.9. Check this in the
Tabular to be sure this is the correct code and
that it has no exclusions or additions. Only
further evaluation by the physician will finally
determine what the principal diagnosis is; but
for now, the case has been coded to the greatest
specificity possible with the information
available in the patient record as K21.9 and
I20.0 or I20.0 and K21.9. Either diagnosis may
be selected as the principal diagnosis. Also code
the history of MI (I25.2) secondarily.
Here’s a case for you to code.
2 
A 75-year-old man is admitted with severe low back pain. He is
known to have prostate cancer as well as severe spondylosis. Spine
x-ray films and a bone scan are ordered. Differential diagnoses are
compression fracture versus bone metastases from prostate cancer.
(Note: The physician would have to be consulted to determine
whether prostate cancer is “current” prostate cancer or “history of”
prostate cancer.)
a 
What are the main terms for compression
fracture? ___________________________
b 
Using “Fracture, traumatic” as the main terms
and “vertebra, wedge, compression” as the
subterms, what code would you assign at this
point?
ICD-10-CM Code: ___________________________
Before you continue to look up other possible subterms, you need
to consider why the patient has severe low back pain. You may need
to query the physician or review the record to determine whether or
not the compression fracture was due to trauma. The term
“idiopathic” means of unknown cause; the term “pathologic” means
due to a disease or accompanying a disease. Let us assume that the
patient record substantiates a diagnosis of a fracture due to a disease
(pathologic). Locate Fracture, pathological and then the subterm
“vertebra.” You are then forwarded to M84.48, which is the correct
code according to the Tabular.
c 
The second diagnosis in the differential diagnoses is metastasis from
prostate cancer. Locating cancer in the Index, you find: “
see also
Neoplasm, by site, malignant.” The potential neoplasm is of the
bone. “Neoplasm” is the main term and “bone” is a subterm.
Secondary is the type of malignancy because the record states that
this patient has prostate cancer (primary) and now has the potential
to have bone (secondary) cancer. Under the “Secondary” column,
what is the correct code for “Neoplasm, bone” for this patient?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
An additional code would be assigned for the prostate cancer.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Original treatment plan not carried out
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. F. Original treatment plan not carried out
Sequence as the principal diagnosis the condition, which after study
occasioned the admission to the hospital, even though treatment may
not have been carried out due to unforeseen circumstances.
EXERCISE 27-5
Original Treatment Plan Not Carried Out
1 
A patient is admitted to the hospital for an elective cholecystectomy.
The patient has chronic cholecystitis, and gallstones were visualized
on x-ray films. After admission, it is noticed that the patient has a
fever, is coughing, and shows some patchy infiltrates on the chest x-
ray film. Surgery is canceled because the patient may have
pneumonia.
This case will have three codes: the cholecystitis with gallstones
(cholelithiasis), pneumonia, and surgery not done.
a 
Cholelithiasis with cholecystitis, without mention of obstruction.
What is the code?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
b 
What is the pneumonia code?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
The procedure that was not done is located in the Index under
“Procedure, not done, because of.” Why was the procedure not
done?
___________________________________________________________
d 
What is the code for the surgery not done?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
No procedure code is submitted because no procedure was done.
2 
A patient is admitted for elective sterilization by tubal ligation. The
patient and her husband decide not to go through with the surgery,
and the surgery is canceled.
a 
How many codes will there be for this case, and
what are the main terms for each?
________________________________________________________________________________________
b 
What is the Z code for the sterilization?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
What is the code for the surgery not done?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Complications
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. G. Complications of surgery and other medical
care
When the admission is for treatment of a complication resulting from
surgery or other medical care, the complication code is sequenced as
the principal diagnosis. If the complication is classified to the T80-T88
series and the code lacks the necessary specificity in describing the
complication, an additional code for the specific complication should
be assigned.
EXERCISE 27-6
Complications of Surgery and Other
Medical Care
1 
A patient is admitted to the hospital because of a postoperative
ileus. The patient had a colectomy for colon cancer at another
facility last week. On admission patient has abdominal pain with
distension and nausea and vomiting.
Patient has not had a bowel movement for 3 days. Patient is
scheduled to see an oncologist regarding adjunctive treatment for
colon cancer.
a 
Patient was admitted for a complication due to surgery. What is the
complication? ____________________________
b 
What code is assigned as the principal diagnosis?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
Is there an additional code that should be assigned to indicate the
exact nature of the complication? ____________
d 
What is the additional code?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
e 
Are there any secondary diagnosis codes that should be assigned?
____________ If so, what are those codes?
_________________________________________________________________
2 
A patient is admitted because of a malfunction of insulin pump. The
patient is a type 1 diabetic and the pump has not been delivering an
accurate dose of insulin.
a 
What is the principal diagnosis and code for this
case?
______________________________________
b 
What is the Z code for long-term use of insulin?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
What additional code should be assigned in this
case?
_____________________________________________________
No ICD-10-PCS procedure code is submitted because no procedure
was done.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Uncertain diagnosis
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. H. Uncertain diagnosis
If the diagnosis documented at the time of discharge is qualified as
“probable”, “suspected”, “likely”, “questionable”, “possible”, or “still
to be ruled out”, or other similar terms indicating uncertainty, code
the condition as if it existed or was established. The bases for these
guidelines are the diagnostic workup, arrangements for further
workup or observation, and initial therapeutic approach that
correspond most closely with the established diagnosis.
Note:
 This guideline is applicable only to inpatient admissions to
short-term, acute, long-term care and psychiatric hospitals.
The basis for this guideline is that the diagnostic workup and
arrangements for further workup, observation, or therapies are the
same whether treating the confirmed condition or ruling the condition
out.
Because hospitals are reimbursed a set payment (Medicare Severity
Diagnosis-Related Groups amount) for each hospitalization for
Medicare patients, the facility resources used are averaged across the
entire patient stay in the hospital. In an outpatient setting, only
confirmed diagnoses may be reported, and rule-out, possible, or
probable diagnoses are not reported if there is a chief complaint, sign,
or symptom that occasioned the visit. In an outpatient setting, each
visit in the process of confirming a diagnosis is reported.
Examples
Uncertain diagnosis
Hospital Inpatient
Diagnosis:
Probable
 bronchitis (code as bronchitis)
Index:
Bronchitis
 J40
Tabular:
J40 Bronchitis
Hospital Inpatient
Diagnosis:
Rule out
 Graves’ disease (code as Graves’ disease)
Index:
Graves’ Disease
—
see
 Hyperthyroidism, with, goiter E05.00
Tabular:
E05.00 Thyrotoxicosis with diffuse goiter without thyrotoxic crisis or storm
Clinic Outpatient
Diagnosis:
Chest pain, 
rule out
 myocardial infarction (code as chest pain)
Index:
Pain(s),
 chest R07.9
Tabular:
R07.9 Chest pain, unspecified
Clinic Outpatient
Diagnosis:
Cough and fever, 
probably
 pneumonia (code as cough and fever)
Index:
Cough
 R05
Index:
Fever
 R50.9
Tabular:
R05 Cough
R50.9 Fever, unspecified
There are two exceptions to this guideline that are identified in the
chapter-specific guidelines. The exceptions are:
■
 
Code B20, AIDS should only be assigned for confirmed cases.
■
 
Code J09.X2, Avian influenza should only be assigned for confirmed
cases.
EXERCISE 27-7
Uncertain Diagnoses
1 
Patient was admitted from the nursing home with fever, cough, and
shortness of breath. Patient has a history of previous
cerebrovascular accident with resultant dysphagia. Patient is being
treated for hypertension. The physician documents the discharge
diagnosis as probable aspiration pneumonia.
a 
What is the principal diagnosis?
__________________________________________________________
b 
How do you code probable aspiration
pneumonia?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
Are there any additional diagnosis codes that
should be assigned in this case?
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
2 
Patient is admitted with hematuria. Investigations show that the
patient likely has a malignant neoplasm of the right kidney. The
patient refused any further interventions or workup. The
physician’s final diagnosis is suspected malignancy right kidney.
a 
What is the principal diagnosis?
_________________________________________________________
b 
How do you code suspected malignancy right
kidney?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c 
Are there additional diagnosis codes that should
be assigned in this case?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. I. Admission from observation unit
1. 
Admission Following Medical Observation
When a patient is admitted to an observation unit for a medical
condition, which either worsens or does not improve, and is
subsequently admitted as an inpatient of the same hospital for this
same medical condition, the principal diagnosis would be the medical
condition which led to the hospital admission.
2. 
Admission Following Post-Operative Observation
When a patient is admitted to an observation unit to monitor a
condition (or complication) that develops following outpatient
surgery, and then is subsequently admitted as an inpatient of the
same hospital, hospitals should apply the Uniform Hospital
Discharge Data Set (UHDDS) definition of principal diagnosis as
“that condition established after study to be chiefly responsible for
occasioning the admission of the patient to the hospital for care.”
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section II. J. Admission from outpatient surgery
When a patient receives surgery in the hospital’s outpatient surgery
department and is subsequently admitted for continuing inpatient
care at the same hospital, the following guidelines should be followed
in selecting the principal diagnosis for the inpatient admission:
• 
If the reason for the inpatient admission is a complication, assign the
complication as the principal diagnosis.
• 
If no complication, or other condition, is documented as the reason
for the inpatient admission, assign the reason for the outpatient
surgery as the principal diagnosis.
• 
If the reason for the inpatient admission is another condition
unrelated to the surgery, assign the unrelated condition as the
principal diagnosis.
EXERCISE 27-8
Admission from Observation Unit or
Outpatient Surgery
1 
Patient is admitted after outpatient percutaneous needle biopsy of
the right kidney. Patient developed atrial fibrillation in the recovery
room and decision was made to admit to ICU. Patient was treated
and monitored on telemetry. The atrial fibrillation resolved and the
patient’s biopsy showed that the patient had lupus nephritis.
a 
What is the principal diagnosis?
___________________________________________________________
b 
What code is assigned to the principal
diagnosis?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
c
 
What secondary diagnosis codes are assigned?
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
d 
Should a procedure code be assigned?
________________
If so, what ICD-10-PCS procedure code is
assigned? ________________
e 
What External Cause codes would be assigned?
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
Complication of other surgical operation
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________ Place of
occurrence, facility
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Reporting additional diagnoses
After determining and coding the principal diagnosis and any
procedures that were performed, a thorough review of the record is
necessary to determine if any additional diagnoses should be coded
and reported. These additional diagnoses have the potential to affect
reimbursement so it is important to capture these conditions.
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section III. Reporting additional diagnoses
General rules for other (additional) diagnoses
For reporting purposes the definition for “other diagnoses” is
interpreted as additional conditions that affect patient care in terms of
requiring:
clinical evaluation; or
therapeutic treatment; or
diagnostic procedures; or
extended length of hospital stay; or
increased nursing care and/or monitoring.
The UHDDS item #11-b defines Other Diagnoses as “all conditions
that coexist at the time of admission, that develop subsequently, or
that affect the treatment received and/or the length of stay. Diagnoses
that relate to an earlier episode which have no bearing on the current
hospital stay are to be excluded.” UHDDS definitions apply to
inpatients in acute care, short-term, long term care and psychiatric
hospital setting. The UHDDS definitions are used by acute care short-
term hospitals to report inpatient data elements in a standardized
manner. These data elements and their definitions can be found in the
July 31, 1985, Federal Register (Vol. 50, No. 147), pp. 31038-40.
Since that time the application of the UHDDS definitions has been
expanded to include all non-outpatient settings (acute care, short
term, long term care and psychiatric hospitals; home health agencies;
rehab facilities; nursing homes, etc).
The general rule is that for reporting purposes, the term “other
diagnoses” is interpreted to refer to additional conditions that affect
patient care in terms of requiring:
■
 
Clinical evaluation; or
■
 
Therapeutic treatment; or
■
 
Diagnostic procedures; or
■
 
Extended length of hospital stay, or
■
 
Increased nursing care and/or monitoring
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section III. Reporting additional diagnoses (paragraph 4)
The following guidelines are to be applied in designating “other
diagnoses” when neither the Alphabetic Index nor the Tabular List in
ICD-10-CM provide direction. The listing of the diagnoses in the
patient record is the responsibility of the attending provider.
A.
 
Previous conditions
If the provider has included a diagnosis in the final diagnostic
statement, such as the discharge summary or the face sheet, it should
ordinarily be coded. Some providers include in the diagnostic
statement resolved conditions or diagnoses and status-post
procedures from previous admission that have no bearing on the
current stay. Such conditions are not to be reported and are coded
only if required by hospital policy.
However, history codes (categories Z80-Z87) may be used as
secondary codes if the historical condition or family history has an
impact on current care or influences treatment.
EXERCISE 27-9
Previous Conditions
Circle the conditions in the following diagnostic lists that would
NOT be coded:
1 
Herpes zoster
History of hysterectomy
Diabetes
2 
Influenza
Hypertension (currently controlled by
medication)
History of peptic ulcer disease
3 
Congestive heart failure
Remote history of appendectomy
Previous arthroscopic surgery to left knee
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section III. B. Abnormal findings
Abnormal findings (laboratory, x-ray, pathologic, and other
diagnostic results) are not coded and reported unless the provider
indicates their clinical significance. If the findings are outside the
normal range and the attending provider has ordered other tests to
evaluate the condition or prescribed treatment, it is appropriate to ask
the provider whether the abnormal finding should be added.
Please note:
 This differs from the coding practices in the outpatient
setting for coding encounters for diagnostic tests that have been
interpreted by a provider.
EXERCISE 27-10
Abnormal Findings
1 
If the physician documents that a patient’s potassium level is 2.5 and
orders potassium supplements with a repeat potassium lab test, is it
acceptable to query the physician about the 2.5 potassium level?
____________
2 
On review of the record the coder notices that the patient’s sodium
level is slightly below normal. There is no documentation of any
treatment, evaluation, or monitoring. Is it acceptable to query the
physician about the abnormal sodium level? ____________
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
The Guideline for uncertain diagnoses is repeated in Section III,
Reporting Additional Diagnoses. Sometimes a physician will
document “rule out” as a final diagnostic statement, but upon review
of the record it is apparent that the diagnosis was actually ruled out. A
diagnosis that has been ruled out should not be coded as if it exists.
ICD-10-CM OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR
CODING AND REPORTING
Section III. C. Uncertain diagnosis
If the diagnosis documented at the time of discharge is qualified as
“probable”, “suspected”, “likely”, “questionable”, “possible”, or “still
to be ruled out” or other similar terms indicating uncertainty, code
the condition as if it existed or was established. The bases for these
guidelines are the diagnostic workup, arrangements for further
workup or observation, and initial therapeutic approach that
correspond most closely with the established diagnosis.
Note:
 This guideline is applicable only to inpatient admissions to
short-term, acute, long-term care and psychiatric hospitals.
Present on admission (POA)
The Deficit Reduction Act (DRA) mandated that all acute-care
facilities that are reimbursed under MS-DRGs identify and report
diagnoses that were present at the time of a patient’s admission. This
policy was implemented October 1, 2007, and expected to save lives
and health care dollars by no longer paying for the treatment of
preventable errors, injuries, and infections that can occur in the
hospital setting. CMS will not pay for conditions considered
preventable, such as pressure ulcers, falls resulting in injury,
infections due to genitourinary or central line catheters, or other
complications that occur during hospitalization.
The Present on Admission (POA) indicator distinguishes between
conditions that develop during a particular hospital stay and those
conditions present at the time of admission. Hospitals were allowed a
1-year grace time and after October 1, 2008, a hospital’s
reimbursement may be affected if certain complications develop after
admission to the hospital. Coding staff will have to assign the POA
indicators to the ICD-10-CM codes that are assigned. This requirement
makes it even more important to have accurate and complete
documentation in the health record. In some instances, it may be
necessary to query the physician if a condition was present at the time
of admission. The Cooperating Parties have developed POA
guidelines that are supplemental to the ICD-10-CM 
Official Guidelines
for Coding and Reporting
 to assist with the application of the POA
requirement.
Development of the ICD-10-PCS
ICD-10-PCS allows more expansion than was possible with Volume 3
of the ICD-9-CM because I-9 lacked specificity (exactness) and didn’t
provide for sufficient expansion to support government payment
systems and data needs. CMS contracted with 3M Health Information
Systems to develop the ICD-10-PCS that replaced the ICD-9-CM
procedure codes (Volume 3) for reporting 
inpatient
 procedures.
Four major objectives guided the development of ICD-10-PCS:
1. 
Completeness.
 There is a unique code for all substantially different
procedures. Previously, procedures performed on different body
parts, using different approaches or of different types, were
sometimes assigned the same code.
2. 
Expandability.
 As new procedures are developed, the structure of
the ICD-10-PCS should allow for incorporation of these new
procedures as unique codes.
3. 
Multiaxial
 (more than one part). ICD-10-PCS should have a
structure such that each code character has, as much as possible, the
same meaning, both within the specific procedure section and across
procedure sections.
4. 
Standardized terminology.
 Although the meaning of a specific
word may vary in common usage, ICD-10-PCS should not include
multiple meanings for the same term; each term should be assigned a
specific meaning, and ICD-10-PCS should include definitions of the
terminology.
A complete, expandable, multiaxial ICD-10-PCS with standardized
terminology allows coding specialists to determine the accurate code
with minimal effort.
The seven characters of the ICD-10-PCS
The ICD-10-PCS has a seven-character alphanumeric code structure.
Each character has as many as 34 different values: 10 digits (0-9) and
24 letters (A-H, J-N, and P-Z) may be assigned to each character. The
letters O and I are not used in order to avoid confusion with the digits
0 and 1. In the ICD-10-PCS, the term “procedure” refers to the
complete designation of the seven characters. Procedures are divided
into sections according to the type of procedure.
Character 1 identifies the section. 
The first character of the procedure code identifies the section. To
assign an ICD-10-PCS code, the section where the procedure is coded
must be identified. For example, a chest x-ray is in the Imaging
section, a breast biopsy is in the Medical and Surgical section, and
crisis intervention is in the Mental Health section. Each section is
identified by a specific character—number or letter. Section titles and
numbers/letters are shown in 
Fig. 27-1
.
EXERCISE 27-11
ICD-10-PCS 1st Character
Using
 
Fig. 27-1
, identify the first section character that would be
assigned to the following procedures. For example, chiropractic
would be “9.”
1 
__________ Gait training (Physical Rehabilitation)
 
FIGURE 27–1
Sections of ICD-10-PCS.
2 
__________ Cesarean section (Obstetrics)
3 
__________ Computerized tomography, spine (Imaging)
4 
__________ Cholecystectomy (Medical and Surgical)
5 
__________ Insertion of radium into cervix (brachytherapy)
(Radiation Oncology)
6 
__________ Cranioplasty (Medical and Surgical)
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Changing characters. 
Characters 2 through 7 have a standard meaning within each section
but may have different meanings across sections. The meanings for
each character are described in each section. For example, 
Fig. 27-2
shows the meanings of the seven characters for the Medical and
Surgical sections, and 
Fig. 27-3
 shows the meanings for the Imaging
section. Notice that several characters have different meanings across
these sections. For instance, the third character in medical and surgical
procedures (see 
Fig. 27-2
) is used to define the root 
operation
(extraction, insertion, removal, etc.), whereas the third character in
imaging procedures (see 
Fig. 27-3
) is used to define the root 
type
(fluoroscopy, MRI, CT, ultrasonography, etc.).
 
FIGURE 27–2
Medical and surgical procedures.
 
FIGURE 27–3
Imaging procedures.
 
STOP
Each code must include seven characters. If a character is not applicable to a
specific procedure, the letter Z is assigned.
Character 2 is the body system. 
The second character identifies the body system in all sections except
Rehabilitation and Mental Health. In these two sections, the second
character identifies the type of procedure performed.
Character 3 is the root operation. 
The third character identifies the root operation in all sections except
Radiation Therapy, Rehabilitation, and Mental Health. In many
sections, only a few root operations are performed, and these
operations are defined in that section. The Medical and Surgical
section uses an extensive list of root operations. The Obstetrics and
Placement sections use some of these same root operations as well as
section-specific root operations. See 
Table 27-1
 (pp. 708-711) for a list
of the Medical and Surgical root operations definitions, explanations,
and examples.
EXERCISE 27-12
Root Operation
Using
 
Table 27-1
, place the character for the root operation term
before its definition:
1 
_________ Taking or letting out fluids and/or gases from a body part
2 
_________ Freeing a body part from an abnormal physical constraint
3 
_________ Taking out or off a device from a body part
4 
_________ Visually and/or manually exploring a body part
5 
_________ Restoring, to the extent possible, a body part to its normal anatomic structure and function
6 
_________ Altering the route of passage of the contents of a tubular body part
7 
_________ Cutting out or off, without replacement, all of a body part
8 
_________ Physical eradication of all or a portion of a body part by direct use of energy, force, or a
destructive agent
9 
_________ Correcting, to the extent possible, a portion of a malfunctioning device or the position of a
displaced device
10 
_________ Cutting out or off, without replacement, a portion of a body part of device in
1 
Bypass
5 
Destruction
7 
Drainage
8 
Excision
L 
Release
M 
Removal of
Device
N 
Repair
R 
Resection
G 
Inspection
T 
Revision
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Table 27–1
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL ROOT OPERATION DEFINITIONS
(SELECT)
Alteration
Definition:
Modifying the anatomic structure of a body part without affecting the function of the
body part
Explanation:
Principal purpose is to improve appearance
Includes/Examples:
Face lift, breast augmentation
Bypass
Definition:
Altering the route of passage of the contents of a tubular body part
Explanation:
Rerouting contents of a body part to a downstream area of the normal route, to a
similar route and body part, or to an abnormal route and dissimilar body part. It
includes one or more anastomosis, with or without the use of a device
Includes/Examples:
Coronary artery bypass, colostomy formation
Change
Definition:
Taking out or off a device from a body part and putting back an identical or similar
device in or on the same body part without cutting or puncturing the skin or a mucous
membrane
Explanation:
ALL CHANGE procedures are coded using the approach EXTERNAL
Includes/Examples:
Urinary catheter change, gastrostomy tube change
Control
Definition:
Stopping, or attempting to stop, postprocedural bleeding
Explanation:
The site of the bleeding is coded as an anatomical region and not to a specific body part
Includes/Examples:
Control of post-prostatectomy hemorrhage, control of post-tonsillectomy hemorrhage
Creation
Definition:
Making a new genital structure that does not physically take the place of a body part
Explanation:
Used only for sex change operations
Includes/Examples:
Creation of vagina in a male, creation of penis in a female
Destruction
Definition:
Physical eradication of all or a portion of a body part by the direct use of energy, force
or a destructive agent
Explanation:
None of the body part is physically taken out
Includes/Examples:
Fulguration of rectal polyp, cautery of skin lesion
Detachment
Definition:
Cutting off all or a portion of the upper or lower extremities
Explanation:
The body part value is the site of the detachment, with a qualifier if applicable to
further specify the level where the extremity was detached
Includes/Examples:
Below knee amputation, disarticulation of shoulder
Dilation
Definition:
Expanding an orifice or the lumen of a tubular body part
Explanation:
The orifice can be a natural orifice or an artificially created orifice. Accomplished by
stretching a tubular body part using intraluminal pressure or by cutting part of the
orifice or wall of the tubular body part
Includes/Examples:
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, pyloromyotomy
Division
Definition:
Cutting into a body part, without draining fluids and/or gases from the body part, in
order to separate or transect a body part
Explanation:
All or a portion of the body part is separated into two or more portions.
Includes/Examples:
Spinal cordotomy, osteotomy
Drainage
Definition:
Taking or letting out fluids and/or gases from a body part
Explanation:
The qualifier DIAGNOSTIC is used to identify drainage procedures that are biopsies.
Includes/Examples:
Thoracentesis, incision and drainage
Excision
Definition:
Cutting out or off, without replacement, a portion of a body part
Explanation:
The qualifier DIAGNOSTIC is used to identify excision procedures that are biopsies
Includes/Examples:
Partial nephrectomy, liver biopsy
Extirpation
Definition:
Taking or cutting out solid matter from a body part
Explanation:
The solid matter may be an abnormal byproduct of a biological function or a foreign
body; it may be imbedded in a body part in the lumen of a tubular body part. The solid
matter may or may not have been previously broken into pieces
Includes/Examples:
Thrombectomy, choledocholithotomy
Extraction
Definition:
Pulling or stripping out or off all or a portion of a body part by the use of force
Explanation:
The qualifier DIAGNOSTIC is used to identify extraction procedures that are biopsies
Includes/Examples:
Dilation and curettage, vein stripping
Fragmentation
Definition:
Breaking solid matter in a body part into pieces
Explanation:
Physical force (e.g., manual, ultrasonic) applied directly or indirectly is used to break
the solid matter into pieces. The solid matter may be an abnormal byproduct of a
biological function or a foreign body. The pieces of solid matter are not taken out
Includes/Examples:
Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy, transurethral lithotripsy
Fusion
Definition:
Joining together portions of an articular body part rendering the articular body part
immobile
Explanation:
The body part is joined together by fixation device, bone graft, or other means
Includes/Examples:
Spinal fusion, ankle arthrodesis
Insertion
Definition:
Putting in a nonbiological appliance that monitors, assists, performs, or prevents a
physiological function but does not physically take the place of a body part
Explanation:
N/A
Includes/Examples:
Insertion of radioactive implant, insertion of central venous catheter
Inspection
Definition:
Visually and/or manually exploring a body part
Explanation:
Visual exploration may be performed with or without optical instrumentation. Manual
exploration may be performed directly or through intervening body layers
Includes/Examples:
Diagnostic arthroscopy, exploratory laparotomy
Map
Definition:
Locating the route of passage of electrical impulses and/or locating functional areas in a
body part
Explanation:
Applicable only to the cardiac conduction mechanism and the central nervous system
Includes/Examples:
Cardiac mapping, cortical mapping
Occlusion
Definition:
Completely closing an orifice or lumen of a tubular body part
Explanation:
The orifice can be a natural orifice or an artificially created orifice
Includes/Examples:
Fallopian tube ligation, ligation of inferior vena cava
Reattachment
Definition:
Putting back in or on all or a portion of a separated body part to its normal location or
other suitable location
Explanation:
Vascular circulation and nervous pathways may or may not be re-established
Includes/Examples:
Reattachment of hand, reattachment of avulsed kidney
Release
Definition:
Freeing a body part from an abnormal physical constraint
Explanation:
Some of the restraining tissue may be taken out but none of the body part is taken out
Includes/Examples:
Adhesiolysis, carpal tunnel release
Removal of
device from
Definition:
Taking out or off a device from a body part
Explanation:
If the device is taken out and a similar device is put in without cutting or puncturing
the skin or mucous membrane, the procedure is coded to the root operation CHANGE.
Otherwise, the procedure for taking out the device is coded to the root operation
REMOVAL
Includes/Examples:
Drainage tube removal, cardiac pacemaker removal
Repair
Definition:
Restoring, to the extent possible, a body part to its normal anatomic structure and
function
Explanation:
Used only when the method to accomplish the repair is not one of the other root
operations
Includes/Examples:
Colostomy takedown, suture of laceration
Replacement
Definition:
Putting in or on biological or synthetic material that physically takes the place and/or
function of all or a portion of a body part
Explanation:
The body part may have been taken out or replaced, or may be taken out, physically
eradicated, or rendered nonfunctional during the Replacement procedure. A Removal
procedure is coded for taking out the device used in a previous replacement procedure
Includes/Examples:
Total hip replacement, bone graft, free skin graft
Reposition
Definition:
Moving to its normal location or other suitable location, all or a portion of a body part
Explanation:
The body part is moved to a new location from an abnormal location, or from a normal
location where it is not functioning correctly. The body part may or may not be cut out
or off to be moved to the new location
Includes/Examples:
Reposition of undescended testicle, fracture reduction
Resection
Definition:
Cutting out or off, without replacement, all of a body part
Explanation:
N/A
Includes/Examples:
Total nephrectomy, total lobectomy of lung
Restriction
Definition:
Partially closing the orifice or lumen of a tubular body part
Explanation:
The orifice can be a natural orifice or an artificially created orifice
Includes/Examples:
Esophagogastric fundoplication, cervical cerclage
Revision
Definition:
Correcting, to the extent possible, a portion of a malfunctioning or the position of a
displaced device
Explanation:
Revision can include correcting a malfunctioning or displaced device by taking out
and/or putting in a part of the device
Includes/Examples:
Adjustment of position of pacemaker lead, recementing of hip prosthesis
Supplement
Definition:
Putting in or on biologic or synthetic material that physically reinforces and/or
augments the function of a portion of a body part
Explanation:
The biological material is non-living, or is living and from the same individual. The
body part may have been previously replaced, and the Supplement procedure is
performed to physically reinforce and/or augment the function of the replaced body
part
Includes/Examples:
Herniorrhaphy using mesh, free nerve graft, mitral valve ring annuloplasty, put a new
acetabular liner in a previous hip replacement
Transfer
Definition:
Moving, without taking out, all or a portion of a body part to another location to take
over the function of all or a portion of a body part
Explanation:
The body part transferred remains connected to its vascular and nervous supply
Includes/Examples:
Tendon transfer, skin pedicle flap transfer
Transplantation
Definition:
Putting in or on all or a portion of a living body part taken from another individual or
animal to physically take the place and/or function of all or a portion of a similar body
part
Explanation:
The native body part may or may not be taken out, and the transplanted body part may
take over all or a portion of its function
Includes/Examples:
Kidney transplant, heart transplant
A closer look at root operations. 
The root operation is described by one of the main terms, as outlined
on page 708 in Table 27-1 (e.g., Alteration, Change, Bypass). These
root operations can be grouped into types of operations, such as
operations that always involve devices: insertion, replacement,
removal, change. 
Table 27-2
 (pp. 711–713) shows the root operations
grouped by types.
EXERCISE 27-13
Root Operation Terms
Using
 
Table 27-2
, identify the root operation term for each example:
1 
___________________ Tendon transfer
2 
___________________ Sigmoid polypectomy
3 
___________________ Diagnostic arthroscopy
4 
___________________ Heart transplant
5 
___________________ Pacemaker insertion
6 
___________________ Cardiac pacemaker removal
7 
___________________ Lithotripsy, gallstones
8 
___________________ Fallopian tube ligation
9 
___________________ Hip prosthesis adjustment
10 
___________________ Peritoneal adhesiolysis
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
Table 27–2
COMPARISON OF MEDICAL AND SURGICAL ROOT
OPERATIONS (SELECT)

The index
ICD-10-PCS codes are described in both the Index and the Tabular
List. The Index is used to locate codes by means of an alphabetic
lookup. The Index is arranged according to root operation terms and
has subentries based on:
■
 
Body System
■
 
Body Part
■
 
Operation (for Revision)
■
 
Device (for Change)
The Index may also be consulted for a specific operation term such
as “Hysterectomy,” where a cross-reference directs you to “
see
Resection, Female Reproductive System, OUT.” Although you need to
become very familiar with the root operations, you may be able to
locate a code for a specific operation such as an appendectomy more
rapidly by looking under the term “Appendectomy” than by
consulting the root operation term “Resection,” subterms “by Body
Part,” and “Appendix.” See 
Fig. 27-4
 for an example of the Index of
the ICD-10-PCS.
 
FIGURE 27–4
ICD-10-PCS Index.
Codes may also be located in the Index by specific procedures such
as X-ray—
see
 Imaging. The Index refers you to a specific entry in the
Tabular List by providing the first three or four digits of the procedure
code. It is always necessary to refer to the Tabular List to obtain the
complete code because the Index contains only the first few numbers
and letters.
The tabular list completes the code
The Tabular List provides the remaining characters needed to
complete the code listed in the Index. The Tabular List is arranged by
sections, and most sections are subdivided by body systems. For each
body system, the Tabular List begins with a list of the operations
performed, that is, the root operations. When a procedure involves
distinct parts, multiple codes are 
provided. For example, a section of
the listing of operations performed in respect to the central nervous
system is as follows:
■
 
Bypass
■
 
Change
■
 
Destruction
■
 
Division
■
 
Drainage
■
 
Excision
The Tabular List for each body system also includes a list of the
body parts, approaches, devices, and qualifiers for that system. These
lists are followed by tables for each root operation in that body
system. At the top of each of the tables is the name of the section, body
system, and root operation as well as the definition of the root
operation. The list is formatted as a grid, with rows and columns. The
four columns in the grid represent the last four characters of the code
(which are labeled Body Part, Approach, Device, and Qualifier in the
Obstetrics and Medical and Surgical sections). Each row in the grid
specifies the allowable combinations of the last four characters. For
example, referring to the grid in 
Fig. 27-5
, you see that the code for
delivery of products of conception is 10E0XZZ:
1 
Obstetrics (Section)
0 
Pregnancy (Body System)
E 
Delivery (Root Operation)
0 
Products of Conception (Body Part, Character 4)
X 
External (Approach, Character 5)
Z 
None (Device, Character 6)
Z 
None (Qualifier, Character 7)
FIGURE 27–5
ICD-10-PCS Tabular.
Code 10E0XZZ would be the only allowable code for Products of
Conception, using an external approach with no devices, because you
may not complete a code by choosing entries from different rows (a
row may consist of multiple entries in a box). Thus the code 10E0XZ6
is not permitted because the qualifier 6 is not an option. If you choose
the character 0, Products of Conception, you must continue to choose
from the available numbers or letters in that same line.
 
From the Trenches
“Don’t stress over learning ICD-10. If you’ve been using ICD-9 for several
years and are comfortable with it, ICD-10 will not be difficult to learn.”
LORI
EXERCISE 27-14
ICD-10-PCS Format
Complete the following:
Achievement of the four major objectives guiding the development
of the ICD-10-PCS will result in a classification system that is
1
______________________________________________________________
2
______________________________________________________________
3
______________________________________________________________
4
______________________________________________________________
Provide the requested information about the ICD-10-PCS code
structure:
5 
The ICD-10-PCS has a ____________________ character code
structure.
6 
The characters in ICD-10-PCS are
____________________________________________________________.
7 
Each character has up to ____________________ different values.
8 
The letters ____________________ are not used as character values.
9 
The complete specification of seven characters describes a
______________________________________ in the ICD-10-PCS.
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix B
)
 Third-party companies typically employ 
Clinical Documentation
Improvement (CDI)
 specialists, who are then hired by medical
providers to advise and implement programs that improve
documentation practices. The use of CDI is especially important to
ensure documentation is specific enough to support the level of detail
required from ICD-10-CM/ICD-10-PCS. Ultimately, it’s the coders’
responsibility to follow up with the provider in order to ensure proper
documentation that meets the quality of coding, medical necessity,
and denial standards of ICD-10-CM/ICD-10-PCS.
CHAPTER REVIEW
NOTE: Chapter Review questions (Parts I and II ONLY) can also be
answered electronically on Evolve. To access, locate the “Instructor-
led assessments” asset in your student resources, then click the
“Chapter Reviews” folder.
Chapter 27 learning objective review
Review the Chapter Learning Objectives located at the beginning of the
chapter, then answer the following questions that relate to each objective
(Answers are located in
 
Appendix E
):
1 What services are referred to as “professional” services?
_____________________________________________________
2 The accuracy of the MS-DRG is dependent on coders applying what
correctly? ___________________________________
3 Volume 3 procedure codes are reported by hospitals for what type
of setting? _____________________________________
4 The term “first-listed diagnosis” refers to what type of setting?
_________________________________________________
5 When a symptom is followed by contrasting or comparative
diagnoses, what should be sequenced first? _______________
6 The Present on Admission indicator distinguishes conditions present
at the time of admission as well as what? __________
7 ICD-10-PCS has a seven-character alphanumeric code structure with
each character having how many different values?
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Chapter 27, part I, theory
1 Codes can be assigned to diagnoses that are documented as being
“probable,” “suspected,” or “likely” in which setting?
Inpatient   Outpatient
2 In which setting can any confirmed or definitive diagnoses be coded
from the interpretation of a diagnostic test result?
Inpatient   Outpatient
3 In which setting would a CPT code be assigned for a herniorrhaphy?
Inpatient   Outpatient
4 Which statement about a significant procedure is NOT true?
a Requires specialized training
b Carries an anesthetic risk
c Is surgical in nature
d Must be performed in an operating room
5 The physician documents flank pain due to renal stone. The flank
pain is the principal diagnosis.
True    False
6 In the inpatient setting, the physician documents suspected
cholelithiasis in the discharge summary. The cholelithiasis is coded as
if it exists.
True    False
7 If the coder doesn’t know if a diagnosis is present on admission, a
POA indicator is not assigned.
True    False
8 A patient is admitted with low-grade fever and right upper
quadrant pain. The physician documents that the patient’s right upper
quadrant pain is due to chronic cholecystitis versus peptic ulcer
disease. Which diagnoses should be reported?
a Chronic cholecystitis
b Peptic ulcer disease
c Chronic cholecystitis, peptic ulcer disease
d Right upper quadrant pain, chronic
cholecystitis, peptic ulcer disease
9 Patient is admitted with hyperglycemia due to new-onset diabetes,
type 2. Patient has had polydipsia, polyuria, and unexplained weight
loss. Which diagnoses should be reported?
a Hyperglycemia, diabetes, type 2
b Diabetes, type 2
c Diabetes, type 2, polydipsia, polyuria, weight
loss
d Hyperglycemia, diabetes, type 2, weight loss
10 Patient is admitted with heartburn due to gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD). Which diagnoses should be reported?
a Heartburn
b Heartburn and GERD
c GERD and heartburn
d GERD
11 The American Medical Association is responsible for the
development of ICD-10-PCS.
True    False
12 In ICD-10-PCS, if a character is not applicable, the letter X is used.
True    False
13 The term “fusion” means the freeing of a body part.
True    False
14 An example of a procedure that involves inspection is:
a gastrojejunal bypass
b control of postprocedural bleeding
c diagnostic arthroscopy
d incision and drainage of abscess
15 Altering the route of passage of the contents of a tubular body part
is a _____________________.
a resection
b bypass
c revision
d drainage
Chapter 27, part II, practical
Assign and sequence codes to the following inpatient diagnoses.
16 Headache due to malignant neoplasm of the brain
ICD-10-CM Code: ________________
17 Patient was admitted with shortness of breath. Patient was found
to have both pneumonia and decompensated congestive heart failure.
The pneumonia was treated with IV antibiotics and the congestive
heart failure with IV Lasix. Both were present on admission.
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
18 Acute cholecystitis versus acute pancreatitis, without necrosis or
infection
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
19 Epigastric pain due to acute cholecystitis versus acute pancreatitis,
without necrosis or infection
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
20 Patient was admitted for elective D&C because of post-menopausal
bleeding. The surgery was cancelled because the surgeon became ill.
The patient’s surgery was rescheduled for next week.
ICD-10-CM Codes: ________________,
________________
21 Patient was admitted for dehiscence of abdominal incision.
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
22 Patient was admitted for medical observation for chest pain. After
the patient was determined to have suffered a NSTEMI (Non-ST
Elevation Myocardial Infarction), the patient was admitted to acute
care.
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
23 Patient was admitted for suspected avian influenza. Avian
influenza was ruled out and it was determined that the patient’s
symptoms were due to viral pneumonia.
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
24 Patient was admitted to the observation unit for exacerbation of
COPD. The patient did not improve and was admitted for continued
care and treatment.
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
25 Patient was admitted following an outpatient
esophagogastroduodenoscopy for dilatation of an esophageal
stricture. The patient was unable to void and was admitted because of
urinary retention.
 ICD-10-CM Code(s): ________________
 ICD-10-PCS Code(s): _______________
Chapter Review answers for Parts I and II are only available in the
TEACH Instructor Resources on Evolve.
APPENDIX A. Online resources
The Evolve Learning Resources offer helpful material that will
extend your studies beyond the classroom. Practice exercises have
been provided for extra practice using TruCode
®
 and are located in
the TruCode
®
 Resources folder on Evolve. 
Official Guidelines for Coding
and Reporting, 
Content Updates, and Coding links help you stay
current with this ever-changing field.
Online Activities and Chapter Review applications provide
electronic assessment options (though answers are still only provided
at the discretion of the instructor).
Once registered for your free Evolve resources at
http://evolve.elsevier.com/Buck/step
, go to the 
Course Content
 section
and click 
Resources
 to reference the following:
Instructor-led Assessments
■
 
Online Activities
■
 
Chapter Reviews
TruCode
®
 30 day access upon clicking
TruCode
®
 Instructions and Practice Exercises
NOTE: It is recommended that you only activate your TruCode
®
 Encoder
Essentials after you have completed all of the text exercises using your
print coding manuals
.
■
 
TruCode
®
 Practice Exercises
■
 
TruCode
®
 Instructions
■
 
TruCode
®
 Help
Coding Tips and Links
■
 
GEMS Files
■
 
ICD-10-CM Official Guidelines for Coding and
Reporting
■
 
ICD-10-PCS Official Guidelines for Coding and
Reporting
■
 
1995 Guidelines for E/M Services
■
 
1997 Documentation Guidelines for Evaluation
and Management Services
■
 
CPT, ICD-10-CM, and HCPCS Update Links
■
 
Study Tips
■
 
WebLinks
Content Updates – Student
APPENDIX B. Exercise answers
Note: The following reference manuals were used in preparing
these answers: 2017 ICD-10-CM, 2017 ICD-10-PCS, 
2017 HCPCS Level
II, and Current Procedural Terminology, 2017.
Current Procedural Terminology
 (CPT) is copyright 2016 American
Medical Association. All Rights Reserved. No fee schedules, basic
units, relative values, or related listings are included in CPT. The
AMA assumes no liability for the data contained herein. Applicable
FARS/DFARS restrictions apply to government use.
Note: For clarity we’ve used different colors to identify the codes
used in each answer. CPT codes are in blue, ICD-10-CM codes are in
red, HCPCS codes are in green, ICD-10-PCS codes are in black.
Chapter 1
Exercise 1-1
1. 
the government
2. 
1965
3. 
A
4. 
B
Exercise 1-2
1. 
October
2. 
November or December
3. 
Department of Health and Human Services
4. 
March 21, 2016
5. 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking King (NPRM)
6. 
Dr. Dan Sosin
Exercise 1-3
1. 
Resource-Based Relative Value Scale
2. 
Federal Register
3. 
OBRA
Exercise 1-4
1. 
fraud
2. 
Office of the Inspector General or OIG
3. 
gatekeeper
4. 
Program for All-Inclusive Care of the Elderly
Chapter 2
Exercise 2-1
1. 
d
2. 
c
3. 
morbidity, mortality
4. 
clinical modification
5. 
Any four of the following six (or similar wording):
a. 
facilitate payment for health services
b. 
evaluate patients’ use of health care facilities
(utilization patterns)
c. 
study health care costs
d. 
research the quality of health care
e. 
predict health care trends
f. 
plan for future health care needs
6. 
verbal, narrative
Exercise 2-2
1. 
c
2. 
e
3. 
a
4. 
b
5. 
f
6. 
d
7. 
c
8. 
f
9. 
b
10. 
a
11. 
e
12. 
d
13. 
b
14. 
c
15. 
a
16. 
b
17. 
a
Exercise 2-3
1. 
Normocytic anemia
2. 
Acute 
prostatitis
3. 
Severe protein calorie 
malnutrition
4. 
Granuloma
 lung
5. 
Pain
 in neck
Exercise 2-4
1. 
c
2. 
a
3. 
b
4. 
d
Exercise 2-5
1. 
essential
2. 
essential
3. 
essential
4. 
nonessential
5. 
essential
Exercise 2-6
1. 
e
2. 
b
3. 
d
4. 
c
5. 
a
Chapter 3
Exercise 3-1
1. 
urinary tract infection
2. 
Crohn’s disease
3. 
sprained knee
4. 
COPD or CHF (either could be first-listed)
5. 
pneumonia
Exercise 3-2
1. 
R10.9
 (Pain, abdominal); 
K92.1
 (Blood, in, feces). Either diagnosis
could be listed first
2. 
K51.90
 (Colitis, ulcerative (chronic))
3. 
R53.83
 (Fatigue); 
R17
 (Jaundice (yellow)). Either diagnosis could be
listed first
4. 
B19.20
 (Hepatitis C (viral))
Exercise 3-3
1. 
admission for elective sterilization
2. 
benign prostatic hypertrophy
3. 
hematuria
Exercise 3-4
1. 
Y92.815
 (Place of Occurrence, train)
2. 
V48.5XXA
 (Accident, transport, car occupant, driver, noncollision
accident [traffic])
3. 
V86.59XA
 (Accident, transport, all-terrain vehicle occupant, driver)
4. 
V80.790A
 (Accident, transport, animal-rider, collision with, non-
motor vehicle)
5. 
V91.83XA
 (Accident, watercraft, causing, injury NEC, specified
type, powered craft)
Exercise 3-5
1. 
Contact, viral disease; 
Z20.828
2. 
Immunization, encounter for; 
Z23
3. 
History, personal, malignant neoplasm (of), oral cavity, specified
site; 
Z85.818
4. 
Z45.018
 (Admission for, adjustment (of), device, implanted, cardiac,
pacemaker)
5. 
Z30.017
 (Contraception, initial prescription, specified type, NEC)
6. 
Z85.46
 (History, personal, malignant neoplasm [of], prostate)
7. 
Z23
 (Immunization, encounter for)
8. 
Z12.31
 (Mammogram, routine)
9. 
Z02.1
 (Encounter, administrative purposes only, examination for,
employment)
Exercise 3-6
1. 
a. 
Z04.1
; b. 
S40.811A
2. 
Z04.41
3. 
Pelvic pain
4. 
Biliary duct stricture
5. 
Post-menopausal bleeding
Exercise 3-7
1. 
Palpitations 
R00.2, 
Arthritis, rheumatoid, 
M06.9
2. 
Memory loss 
R41.3, 
diabetes mellitus, type II 
E11.9, 
long-term
(current) use of insulin 
Z79.4
3. 
Either diagnosis can be first-listed. 
I10
 hypertension or 
E53.8
vitamin B12 deficiency.
Exercise 3-8
1. 
Pain, joint, knee 
M25.561, 
Stiffness, knee 
M25.661.
 Osteoarthritis is
not reported because it has not been confirmed and is a “rule out”
diagnosis.
2. 
Pain, wrist 
M25.532, 
numbness 
R20.0.
 Carpal tunnel syndrome is
not reported because the condition has not been confirmed, rather it is
a “probable” condition.
3. 
Amenorrhea 
N91.2, 
Galactorrhea not associated with childbirth,
N64.3.
 Pituitary tumor is not coded because it has not been confirmed.
4. 
Breast lump 
N63.
 Breast cancer is not reported because the
condition has not been confirmed.
Exercise 3-9
1. 
J44.0
 (Bronchitis, acute or subacute, with, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease), 
F17.210
 (Dependence, nicotine, cigarettes)
2. 
J44.9
 (Disease, airway, obstructive, chronic), 
F17.210
 (Dependence,
nicotine, cigarettes)
Exercise 3-10
1. 
Z01.83
 (Encounter, blood typing)
2. 
Z00.00
 (Examination, annual)
Exercise 3-11
1. 
Z51.11
 (Chemotherapy, neoplasm); 
C56.2
 (Table of Neoplasms,
Neoplasm, ovary, Malignant Primary)
2. 
D52.0
 (Anemia, deficiency, folate, dietary)
3. 
Z01.82
 (Examination, allergy)
Exercise 3-12
1. 
a
2. 
b
3. 
c
Chapter 4
Exercise 4-1
1. 
K46.9, K40.90, K40.3, K40.31
2. 
I10
Exercise 4-2
1. 
Abdominal pain, nausea and sometimes vomiting, loss of appetite,
low-grade fever, constipation, diarrhea, inability to pass gas,
abdominal swelling (any two of these)
2. 
chest pain
3. 
False
4. 
False
5. 
chest pain, shortness of breath
6. 
hip pain, contusion of hip
Exercise 4-3
1. 
N41.1
 (Prostatitis, chronic); 
B95.5
 (Infection, bacterial, as cause of
disease classified elsewhere, Streptococcus) [in this order]
2. 
J20.8
 (Bronchitis, due to, specified organism NEC); 
B96.5
 (Infection,
bacterial, as cause of disease classified elsewhere, Pseudomonas) [in
this order]
3. 
E10.52
 (Diabetes, Type 1, with, gangrene). It would be incorrect to
report E10.59 and I96 when a combination code is available.
4. 
N39.0
 (Infection, urinary [tract]); 
B96.20
 (Infection, bacterial, as
cause of disease classified elsewhere, Escherichia coli) [in this order]
5. 
E85.4
 (Cardiomyopathy, amyloid); 
I43
 (Cardiomyopathy, amyloid).
When referencing Cardiomyopathy as the main term and amyloid as
the subterm in the Index of the I-10, the coder is directed to report I43
by the placement of I43 in brackets following E85.4. The codes must
also be reported in the order directed in the Index—code E85.4 is
reported first followed by I43.
Exercise 4-4
1. 
J14
 (Pneumonia, Hemophilus influenzae)
2. 
B37.0
 (Candidiasis, mouth)
3. 
A04.7
 (Enteritis, Clostridium, difficile)
4. 
A02.0
 (Gastroenteritis, Salmonella)
Exercise 4-5
1. 
Residual: scars, face
Cause: third-degree burns
2. 
Residual: constrictive pericarditis
Cause: tuberculosis infection
3. 
Residual: foreign body, femur
Cause: gunshot injury, femur
4. 
Residual: intellectual disabilities
Cause: poliomyelitis
5. 
Residual: leg pain
Cause: fracture, femur
6. 
Residual: arthritis
Cause: pathological fracture
Code: 
M19.90
 (Arthritis); 
M84.451S
 (Fracture,
pathologic, femur)
7. 
Residual: sensorineural deafness
Cause: meningitis
Codes: 
H90.5
 (Deafness, sensorineural); 
G09
(Sequela [of], meningitis, other or unspecified
cause)
Chapter 5
Exercise 5-1
1. 
A08.4
 (Gastroenteritis, viral NEC)
2. 
A41.52
 (Sepsis, Gram-negative[organism]); 
R65.21
 (Shock, septic
[due to severe sepsis])
3. 
A80.9
 (Poliomyelitis)
Exercise 5-2
1. 
B37.3
 (Candidiasis, vagina)
2. 
B01.12
 (Myelitis, postchickenpox)
3. 
B34.3
 (Infection, parvovirus NEC)
4. 
B37.0
 (Thrush, oral)
5. 
B85.1
 (Infestation, Pediculus, body)
Exercise 5-3
1. 
Z51.11
 (Chemotherapy, [session] [for], cancer); 
C56.9
 (Neoplasm,
ovary, Malignant Primary)
2. 
Z51.0
 (Admission [for], radiation therapy [antineoplastic]); 
C79.51
(Neoplasm, bone, Malignant Secondary); 
Z85.3
 (History, personal [of],
malignant neoplasm, breast)
3. 
a. metastatic carcinoma of bronchus
b. 
primary, unknown
c. 
secondary
d. 
C78.00
 (Neoplasm, bronchus, Malignant
Secondary); 
C80.1
 (Neoplasm, unknown site
or unspecified, Malignant Primary)
4. 
a. Three
b. 
Nausea with vomiting; 
R11.2
 (Nausea, with
vomiting)
c. 
Adverse effect of chemotherapy treatment;
T45.1X5A
 (Complication, chemotherapy
(antineoplastic) NEC)
d. 
Lung cancer; 
C34.90
 (Neoplasm, lung,
unspecified site, Malignant Primary)
5. 
C16.9
 (Neoplasm, stomach, Malignant Primary), 
D63.0
 (Anemia, in
neoplastic disease)
Exercise 5-4
1. 
C90.00
 (Myeloma, [multiple])
2. 
D06.9
 (Neoplasm, cervix, Ca in situ)
3. 
C18.7
 (Neoplasm, intestine, intestinal, large, colon, sigmoid,
Malignant Primary); 
C78.6
 (Neoplasm, peritoneum [cavity],
Malignant Secondary)
4. 
C61
 (Neoplasm, prostate [gland], Malignant Primary); 
C79.51
(Neoplasm, bone, Malignant Secondary)
5. 
C79.31
 (Neoplasm, brain NEC, Malignant Secondary); 
C80.1
(Neoplasm, unknown site or unspecified, Malignant Primary)
6. 
C78.00
 (Neoplasm, lung, unspecified site, Malignant Secondary);
Z85.3
 (History, personal (of), malignant neoplasm (of), breast). Note:
This is personal history, not family history, Z80.3
7. 
Z51.11
 (Encounter, chemotherapy, for neoplasm); 
C18.7
 (Neoplasm,
intestine, large, colon, sigmoid, Malignant Primary)
Exercise 5-5
1. 
D51.0
 (Anemia, pernicious)
2. 
D65
 (Afibrinogenemia, acquired)
3. 
D66
 (Hemophilia, A)
4. 
D62
 (Anemia, blood loss, acute)
5. 
D75.0
 (Polycythemia, benign [familial])
Exercise 5-6
1. 
E27.1
 (Addison’s, disease [bronze] or syndrome)
2. 
E86.0
 (Dehydration)
3. 
E11.641
 (Diabetes, type 2, with, hypoglycemia, with coma)
4. 
E05.01
 (Hyperthyroidism, with goiter [diffuse], with thyroid storm)
5. 
E10.51
 (Diabetes, type 1, with, peripheral angiopathy); 
E10.621
(Diabetes, type I, with foot ulcer); 
L97.509
 (Ulcer, lower limb, foot
specified NEC)
6. 
E46
 (Malnutrition)
Exercise 5-7
1. 
G30.9
 (Disease, Alzheimer’s); 
F02.81
 (Disease, Alzheimer’s, with
behavioral disturbance) [in this order]
2. 
F41.8
 (Depression, anxiety)
3. 
F73
 (Disability, intellectual, profound [IQ under 20])
4. 
F50.00
 (Anorexia, nervosa)
5. 
F10.231
 (Dependence [on], alcohol, with, withdrawal, with,
delirium)
6. 
F11.23
 (Dependence, drug, opioid, with, withdrawal)
Exercise 5-8
1. 
G00.8
 (Meningitis, bacterial, specified organism NEC); 
B96.4
(Infection, bacterial NOS, as cause of disease classified elsewhere,
Proteus [mirabilis] [morganii])
2. 
G35
 (Sclerosis, multiple)
3. 
G51.0
 (Palsy, facial)
4. 
G40.901
 (Seizure, febrile, complex, with status epilepticus)
Exercise 5-9
1. 
H40.1111
 (Glaucoma, open angle, primary)
2. 
H04.571
 (Stenosis, lacrimal, sac)
Exercise 5-10
1. 
H66.91
 (Otitis, media, acute)
2. 
H60.332
 (Swimmer’s ear)
3. 
H65.03
 (Otitis, media, nonsuppurative, acute or subacute, serous)
Exercise 5-11
1. 
I50.9
 (Failure, heart, congestive)
2. 
I21.4
 (Infarction, subendocardial)
3. 
I15.8
 (Hypertension, secondary, specified NEC); 
M30.0
 (Periarteritis
nodosa)
4. 
I63.30
 (Infarct, cerebral, due to, thrombosis, cerebral artery)
5. 
I60.9
 (Hemorrhage, intracranial [nontraumatic], subarachnoid)
6. 
N17.9
 (Failure, kidney, acute); 
I10
 (Hypertension)
Exercise 5-12
1. 
J05.0
 (Croup)
2. 
J96.90
 (Failure, respiratory), 
I50.9
 (Failure, heart, congestive)
3. 
J44.9
 (Disease, lung, obstructive [chronic], with, bronchitis)
4. 
J11.1
 (Influenza, with, respiratory manifestations NEC)
5. 
J14
 (Pneumonia, due to, Hemophilus influenzae)
6. 
J44.9
 (Disease, lung, obstructive, with emphysema)
7. 
J69.0
 (Pneumonia, aspiration)
Chapter 6
Exercise 6-1
1. 
K35.2
 (Appendicitis, with, peritonitis, generalized)
2. 
K26.0
 (Ulcer, duodenum, acute, with, hemorrhage)
3. 
K80.12
 (Calculus, gallbladder, with, cholecystitis, acute, with,
chronic cholecystitis)
4. 
K52.9
 (Gastroenteritis)
5. 
K21.9
 (Reflux, gastroesophageal)
Exercise 6-2
1. 
L29.2
 (Pruritus, vulva, vulvae)
2. 
L74.0
 (Rash, heat)
3. 
L40.1
 (Psoriasis, pustular [generalized])
4. 
L89.309
 (Ulcer, pressure, buttock)
5. 
L23.7
 (Dermatitis, contact, allergic, due to, plants, non-food)
6. 
L03.039
 (Cellulitis, toe)
7. 
L05.01
 (Cyst, pilonidal, with abscess)
Exercise 6-3
1. 
M06.9
 (Arthritis, rheumatoid)
2. 
M54.2
 (Pain, neck NEC)
3. 
M24.411
 (Dislocation, recurrent, shoulder)
4. 
M84.522A
 (Fracture, pathological, due to, neoplastic disease,
humerus); 
C79.51
 (Neoplasm, bone, Malignant Secondary); 
Z85.3
(History, personal (of), malignant neoplasm, breast)
Chapter 7
Exercise 7-1
1. 
O02.0
 (Blighted ovum)
2. 
O03.4
 (Abortion, incomplete [spontaneous]); 
Z3A.00
 (Pregnancy,
weeks of gestation, not specified)
3. 
O47.1
 (False, labor [pains], at or after 37 completed weeks of
gestation); 
Z3A.38
 (Pregnancy, weeks of gestation, 38 weeks)
4. 
O70.3
 (Laceration, perineum, female, during delivery, fourth
degree); 
Z37.0
 (Outcome of delivery, single NEC, liveborn); 
Z3A.00
(Pregnancy, weeks of gestation, not specified)
5. 
O65.4
 (Delivery, complicated by, obstructed labor, due to, fetopelvic
disproportion); 
Z37.0
 (Outcome of delivery, single NEC, liveborn);
Z3A.00
 (Pregnancy, weeks of gestation, not specified)
Exercise 7-2
1. 
Q17.8
 (Absence [of], ear, congenital, lobe)
2. 
Z38.00
 (Newborn [infant] [liveborn] [singleton], born in hospital);
Q53.20
 (Cryptorchid, bilateral)
3. 
Q99.2
 (Syndrome, fragile X)
4. 
Q65.01
 (Dislocation, hip, congenital, unilateral)
Exercise 7-3
1. 
R68.12
 (Fussy baby)
2. 
R07.1
 (Pain[s], chest, on breathing)
3. 
R92.8
 (Abnormal, mammogram NEC)
4. 
R87.619
 (Abnormal, Papanicolaou (smear), cervix)
5. 
R03.0
 (Blood, pressure, high, incidental reading, without diagnosis
of hypertension)
6. 
R10.9
 (Pain[s], abdominal); 
R50.9
 (Fever); 
R30.0
 (Dysuria).
Urosepsis is not coded because it was ruled out.
7. 
R07.9
 (Pain[s], chest); 
R10.13
 (Pain[s], epigastric). Myocardial
infarction would not be reported as it is being “ruled out.”
Exercise 7-4
1. 
T21.32XA
 (Burn, abdomen, third degree); 
T24.219A
 (Burn, thigh,
second degree); 
T31.11
—15% with 10% third degree (Burn, extent);
X12.XXXA
 (External Cause Index: Burning, hot, fluid)
2. 
T24.312D
 (Burn, thigh, left, third degree); 
B99.9
 (Infection); 
T31.0
—
41⁄2% (Burn, extent) (No X code is required for subsequent treatment.)
3. 
T25.221A
 (Burn, foot, right, second degree) (Note that only the
highest-level burn is coded when burns are in the same area.); 
T31.0
—
21⁄4% (Burn, extent); 
X03.0XXA
 (External Cause Index: Fire,
controlled, not in building or structure) Note when referencing
Exposure, bonfire, the External Cause Index directs the coder to
reference Exposure, fire, controlled, not in building.
4. 
T23.301D
 (Burn, hand, right, third degree); 
T31.0
—21⁄4% (Burn,
extent) (No X code is required for subsequent treatment.)
5. 
T21.31XD
 (Burn, chest wall, third degree); 
T22.211D
 (Burn, forearm,
second degree); 
T23.101D
 (Burn, hand, right, first degree); 
T31.10
—
11% (Burn, extent) with 0-9% third degree [in this order] (No X code is
required for subsequent treatment.)
Exercise 7-5
1. 
T51.0X4D
 (Alcohol, ethyl, Poisoning, Undetermined)
2. 
T60.3X1D
 (Herbicide NEC, Poisoning, Accidental)
3. 
T42.4X1A
 (Valium, Poisoning, Accidental)
Exercise 7-6
1. 
S72.92XM
 (Fracture, traumatic, femur); 
D62
 (Anemia, post-
hemorrhagic, acute)
Exercise 7-7
1. 
T85.79XA
 (Complications, breast implants, infection or
inflammation)
2. 
T86.01
 (Rejection, transplant, bone, marrow)
3. 
T81.4XXD
 (Abscess, operative wound); 
B99.9
 (Infection, infected,
infective [opportunistic])
4. 
T82.118D
 (Complications, cardiovascular device, graft, or implant,
electronic, mechanical, breakdown)
Chapter 8
Exercise 8-1
1. 
American Medical Association or AMA
2. 
Current Procedural Terminology
3. 
services
4. 
1966
5. 
1983
Exercise 8-2
1. 
c
2. 
a
3. 
g
4. 
b
5. 
d
6. 
e
7. 
f
8. 
Appendix B
9. 
Appendix E
10. 
Appendix D
Exercise 8-3
1. 
Surgery
2. 
Respiratory System
3. 
Nose
4. 
Excision
Exercise 8-4
1. 
A concise statement describing the symptom, problem, condition,
diagnosis, or other factor that is the reason for the encounter, usually
stated in the patient’s words
2. 
different
3. 
interpreting physician
4. 
a physician
5. 
99070
Exercise 8-5
1. 
those codes that have full description (or similar wording)
2. 
those codes that include their own description as well as that
portion of the stand-alone code description found before the
semicolon in a preceding code (or similar wording)
3. 
alternative anatomic site, alternative procedure, or description of
the extent of service (in any order and similar wording)
Exercise 8-6
1. 
-62
2. 
43820-62
3. 
-50
4. 
-78
5. 
-57
6. 
-51
7. 
-66
8. 
-80
Exercise 8-7
1. 
69799, 29999, 43499
2. 
88299, 81099, 84999
3. 
99199
4. 
77799, 78999
Exercise 8-8
1. 
49900
2. 
27303
3. 
27786-27814
Exercise 8-9
1. 
a. Emergency
b. 
99288
 (Emergency Department Services,
Physician Direction of Advanced Life
Support)
2. 
a. Fracture
b. 
27238
 (Fracture, Femur, Intertrochanteric,
Closed Treatment)
3. 
a. Removal, Caliculi, (Stone)
b. 
47480
 (Calculus, Removal, Biliary Tract)
4. 
a. Resection
b. 
32141
 (Resection, Lung, Bullae)
Exercise 8-10
1. 
See
 Dialysis
2. 
See
 Antinuclear Antibodies (ANA)
3. 
See
 Radius; Ulna; Wrist
Chapter 9
Exercise 9-1
1. 
f
2. 
e
3. 
j
4. 
g
5. 
b
6. 
a
7. 
d
8. 
i
9. 
h
10. 
c
Exercise 9-2
1. 
into the subarachnoid space
2. 
into a vein
3. 
into a muscle
4. 
under the skin
5. 
through the respiratory system
Exercise 9-3
1. 
a. Current Procedural Terminology or CPT, Level I
b. 
National Codes, Level II
2. 
G, K, Q, S, T (in any order)
3. 
No
4. 
J codes
5. 
oral
6. 
E codes
7. 
a. -NU
b. 
-E2
c. 
-AM
8. 
IV
9. 
up to 1 g
10. 
J9045
11. 
A4918
Chapter 10
Exercise 10-1
1. 
57270-22
2. 
54535-22
ICD-10-CM: 
C62.12
 (Neoplasm, testis, testes,
descended, Malignant Primary), 
N99.61
(Complications, intraoperative, hemorrhage,
genitourinary organ or structure, during
procedure on genitourinary organ or structure)
3. 
-23
ICD-10-CM: 
K92.0
 (Hematemesis); 
G30.9
(Disease, Alzheimer’s), 
G30.9 [F02.81] (Disease,
Alzheimer’s, with behavioral disturbance)
4. 
-24
ICD-10-CM: 
G30.9, F02.80
 (Disease, Alzheimer’s)
5. 
-25
6. 
-26
Exercise 10-2
1. 
-32
ICD-10-CM: 
Z02.6
 (Encounter, administrative
purpose only, examination for, insurance)
2. 
-47
3. 
-50
ICD-10-CM: 
G56.03
 (Syndrome, carpal tunnel)
4. 
17274
 and 
17264-51
ICD-10-CM: 
C44.40
 (Neoplasm, skin, neck,
Malignant Primary); 
C44.601
 (Neoplasm, skin,
limb, upper Malignant Primary)
(Code 17274 is more resource-intensive and listed
first without the modifier.)
5. 
61154
 and 
61154-50
 or 
61154-50
ICD-10-CM: 
I62.03
 (Hemorrhage, intracranial,
subdural, chronic)
6. 
28450
 and 
28450-51
7. 
27447
 and 
27447-50
 (Arthroplasty, Knee)
8. 
-52
9. 
24006
 and 
24006-50
 or 
24006-50
 or 
24006-RT
 and 
24006-LT
10. 
19305
 and 
19305-50
 or 
19305-50
 and 
19305-RT
 and 
19305-LT
Exercise 10-3
1. 
-58
ICD-10-CM: 
C77.9
 (Neoplasm, lymph, gland,
Malignant Secondary); 
C80.1
 (Neoplasm,
unknown site, Malignant Primary)
2. 
43124-54
3. 
19306-55
4. 
19306-56
Exercise 10-4
1. 
-62
2. 
-66
ICD-10-CM: 
B18.2
 (Hepatitis, C [viral], chronic);
K74.60
 (Cirrhosis)
3. 
-80
4. 
-81
5. 
-78
6. 
-79
7. 
-77
Exercise 10-5
1. 
-99
2. 
-90
3. 
-91
Chapter 11
Exercise 11-1
1. 
office or in an outpatient or other ambulatory facility
2. 
office visit or other outpatient service
3. 
new
4. 
99201
5. 
five
6. 
five
Exercise 11-2
1. 
problem focused
2. 
expanded problem focused
3. 
detailed
4. 
comprehensive
5. 
comprehensive
Exercise 11-3
1. 
problem focused
2. 
expanded problem focused
3. 
detailed
4. 
comprehensive
5. 
comprehensive
Exercise 11-4
1. 
OS
2. 
BA
3. 
OS
4. 
OS
5. 
OS
6. 
OS
7. 
OS
8. 
BA
9. 
BA
10. 
BA
11. 
OS
12. 
OS
13. 
BA
14. 
OS
15. 
OS
16. 
BA
17. 
OS
18. 
OS
19. 
OS
20. 
OS
Note: Some terms—thorax, lungs, heart, vagina, blood vessels,
neurologic—are specifically presented in the text as being a body area
or an organ system. For other terms, you have to make the connection;
for example, the thorax is examined as a body area but the lungs are
examined as an organ system.
21. 
a. expanded problem focused (CC, brief HPI, problem pertinent
ROS, and no PFSH required)
b. 
expanded problem focused (the
constitutional and one organ system, equals 2
for an expanded problem focused
examination)
22.
CC:
Cold
HPI:
Quality (dry, hacking)
Location (nasal)
Duration (9 days)
Associated Signs and Symptoms (sleeplessness)
HPI ELEMENTS (4) = COMPREHENSIVE
PFSH:
Personal
Family
PFSH ELEMENTS (2) = COMPREHENSIVE
ROS:
Constitutional (fever, aching)
Respiratory (coughing)
ROS ELEMENTS (2) = DETAILED
a. 
detailed (Level 3)
General survey: Minor distress
Vital signs: Temperature, BP, pulse
CONSTITUTIONAL (no matter how many
elements checked off it only counts as 1) = 1
BODY AREAS: Head = 1
ORGAN SYSTEMS: Respiratory (mucous
membranes, lungs clear to percussion and
auscultation), Otolaryngologic (ears, nose) 5 2
b. 
Expanded Problem Focused
Detailed history
EPF Exam
Exercise 11-5
1. 
limited (Some chart audit forms classify a new problem with no
further follow-up planned as multiple.)
2. 
limited (The data could be moderate if the patient has brought
records that the physician would have to review.)
3. 
moderate
4. 
low
5. 
99203
M51.06
 (Disorder, disc, with, myelopathy,
lumbosacral region)
6. 
straightforward or low
H65.01
 (Otitis, media, nonsuppurative, acute,
serous)
7. 
low (risks are increased for the elderly)
J01.90
 (Sinusitis, acute)
Exercise 11-6
1. 
b or c
H65.191
 (Otitis, media, nonsuppurative, acute or
subacute NEC)
2. 
d or e
J44.1
 (Disease, lung, obstructive, with, acute,
exacerbation NEC), 
Z99.81
 (Dependence, on,
oxygen)
3. 
e
R06.02
 (Shortness, breath), 
I42.0
(Cardiomyopathy, congestive)
4. 
c
S63.602A
 (Sprain, thumb), 
V00.138A
 (External
Cause Index, Accident, transport, pedestrian,
conveyance occupant, skateboard), 
Y93.51
(External Cause Index, Activity, skateboarding)
5. 
a
I10
 (Hypertension, hypertensive)
6. 
b
J30.1
 (Allergy, grass [pollen])
Exercise 11-7
1. 
detailed, detailed, low
2. 
comprehensive, comprehensive, moderate
3. 
comprehensive, comprehensive, high
4. 
99203
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit, New
Patient), 
Z30.09
 (Counseling, contraceptive)
5. 
99201
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit, New
Patient)
Z48.02
 (Suture, removal)
6. 
99205
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit, New
Patient)
F32.9
 (Depression), 
R45.851
 (Ideation, suicidal),
G47.00
 (Insomnia), 
F17.210
 (Dependence, drug,
nicotine, cigarettes)
7. 
99203
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit, New
Patient)
S83.411A
 (Sprain, knee, [tibial] medial collateral
ligament), 
Y93.22
 (External Cause Index,
Activity, ice, hockey)
8. 
99202
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit, New
Patient)
J30.1
 (Allergy, grass, [pollen])
Exercise 11-8
1. 
yes
2. 
99212
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit,
Established Patient) (Note: Some chart audit forms would assign
99213 because of the antibiotic prescription.)
3. 
99211
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit,
Established Patient)
S83.512D
 (Sprain, knee, cruciate ligament,
anterior)
4. 
99215
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit,
Established Patient)
R55
 (Fainting)
5. 
99213
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit,
Established Patient)
R53.81
 (Malaise), 
R53.83
 (Fatigue), 
T46.5X5A
(Table of Drugs and Chemicals,
Antihypertensive drug NEC, Adverse Effect),
I10
 (Hypertension, Unspecified)
(Note: Although the MDM complexity is at the
level of code 99214, the history and examination
were at the level of code 99213; because two of
the three key components must be documented
in order to use 99214, you must assign the
lower level, 99213.)
6. 
99212
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit,
Established Patient)
L91.8
 (Tag, skin)
7. 
99213
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visit,
Established Patient)
R19.7
 (Diarrhea)
Exercise 11-9
1. 
99219
 (Hospital Services, Observation, Initial Care)
S06.0X1A
 (Concussion), 
V49.9XXA
 (External
Cause Index, Accident, transport, car, occupant)
Exercise 11-10
1. 
99221
 (Hospital Services, Inpatient Services, Initial Hospital Care)
2. 
99223
 (Hospital Services, Inpatient Services, Initial Hospital Care)
3. 
comprehensive, moderate
4. 
99221
 (Hospital Services, Inpatient Services, Initial Hospital Care)
N30.01
 (Cystitis, acute, with hematuria), 
N10
(Pyelitis, acute), 
N71.9
 (Endometritis)
Exercise 11-11
1. 
30 minutes or less, more than 30 minutes
2. 
no
Exercise 11-12
1. 
99244
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient)
M84.48XA
 (Fracture, pathological, due to,
specified disease NEC, vertebrae), 
Z85.3
(History, personal, malignant neoplasm, breast)
2. 
99241
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient)
M77.8
 (Enthesopathy, elbow region), 
M70.31
(Bursitis, elbow)
3. 
99242
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient)
Z01.810
 (Examination, pre-procedural,
cardiovascular), 
M17.11
 (Osteoarthrosis,
localized, primary, knee), 
I10
 (Hypertension),
I25.10
 (Arteriosclerosis, coronary [artery])
4. 
99241
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient)
K64.8
 (Hemorrhoids, internal)
5. 
99244
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient)
R06.00
 (Dyspnea), 
R53.83
 (Fatigue), 
R42
(Dizziness), 
I34.0
 (Insufficiency, mitral [valve]),
Z95.0
 (Status, pacemaker, cardiac)
6. 
99252
 (Consultation, Inpatient)
I48.91
 (Fibrillation, atrial)
7. 
99255-57
 (Consultation, Inpatient) (Modifier -57 indicates the
decision to perform surgery.)
8. 
99252
 (Consultation, Inpatient)
9. 
99255
 (Consultation, Inpatient)
R56.00
 (Convulsions, febrile)
10. 
99233
 (Hospital Inpatient Services, Subsequent Hospital Care)
I23.7
 (Angina, following acute myocardial
infarction), 
I47.2
 (Tachycardia, ventricular)
(Note that angina and tachycardia are not
reported as both of these are symptoms of
myocardial infarction.)
11. 
99233
 (Hospital Inpatient Services, Subsequent Hospital Care)
R56.00
 (Seizures, febrile)
12. 
99244
 (Consultation, Office
Q21.3
 (Tetralogy of Fallot)
13. 
99242-32
 (Consultation, Office) (Modifier -32, insurance company
requested)
14. 
99244-32
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient) (Modifier
-32 indicates a mandatory consultation.)
Exercise 11-13
1. 
self-limited or minor
2. 
high
3. 
moderate
4. 
low to moderate
5. 
99285
 (Evaluation and Management, Emergency Department)
I46.9
 (Arrest, cardiac)
6. 
99285
 (Evaluation and Management, Emergency Department)
J80
 (Distress, respiratory, adult)
7. 
99283
 (Evaluation and Management, Emergency Department)
8. 
99288
 (Emergency Department Services, Physician Direction of
Advanced Life Support)
Exercise 11-14
1. 
99291
 (Evaluation and Management, Critical Care Services)
2. 
no
3. 
99291
 and 
99292 × 4
 (180 minutes of care) (Evaluation and
Management, Critical Care)
T31.50
 (Burn, unspecified site)
Exercise 11-15
1. 
moderate
2. 
99306
 (Nursing Facility Services, Initial Care)
I69.352
 (Sequelae, infarction, cerebral,
hemiplegia), 
E11.9
 (Diabetes), 
I10
(Hypertension, Unspecified)
3. 
c
4. 
b
5. 
a
6. 
99308
 (Nursing Facility Services, Subsequent Care)
J06.9
 (Infection, respiratory, upper [acute] NOS),
R40.20
 (Coma), 
S06.9X6S
 (Injury, brain
[traumatic])
Exercise 11-16
1. 
99347
 (Home Services, Established Patient)
Exercise 11-17
1. 
no
2. 
no, in addition to another E/M code
3. 
no, the physician has to spend at least 30 minutes
4. 
whether the patient is an inpatient or an outpatient
5. 
no, by time
6. 
no
Exercise 11-18
1. 
30 minutes or more
2. 
99366, 99367, 99368
Exercise 11-19
1. 
age
2. 
-25
Exercise 11-20
1. 
Basic Life and/or Disability Evaluation Services
2. 
Work-Related or Medical Disability Evaluation Services
3. 
whether the treating physician or a physician other than the treating
physician conducted the evaluation
4. 
99455
 (Insurance, Disability Examination, Disability)
Z02.71
 (Encounter [with health service] [for],
administrative purpose only, examination for,
disability determination), 
J44.9
 (Disease, lung,
obstructive, with, emphysema)
Exercise 11-21
1. 
very low birth weight
2. 
99466
 (Critical Care Services, Interfacility Transport)
3. 
99463
 (Newborn Care, History and Examination)
4. 
99476
 (Critical Care Services, Pediatric, Subsequent)
5. 
99478
 (Critical Care Services, Neonatal, Low Birth Weight Infant)
Exercise 11-22
1. 
99201
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visits, New
Patient)
H70.009
 (Mastoiditis, acute)
2. 
99212
 (Office and Other Outpatient Visits, Office Visits, Established
Patient)
H66.90
 (Otitis, media, acute)
3. 
99211
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visits,
Established Patient)
4. 
99306
 (Nursing Facility Services, Initial Care)
5. 
99202
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visits, New
Patient)
L70.0
 (Acne, pustular)
6. 
99211
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Office Visits,
Established Patient)
7. 
99285
 (Evaluation and Management, Emergency Department)
I47.1
 (Tachycardia, paroxysmal, nodal)
8. 
99291
 (Evaluation and Management, Critical Care)
9. 
99291
 (Evaluation and Management, Critical Care) and 
99292
(Evaluation and Management, Critical Care)
10. 
99214
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, Established
Patient)
11. 
99254
 (Evaluation and Management, Consultation)
Chapter 12
Exercise 12-1
1. 
Radiologic Procedures, Burn Excisions or Debridement, Obstetrics,
and Other Procedures
2. 
absence of pain
3. 
induction or administration of a drug to obtain partial or complete
loss of sensation (or similar wording)
4. 
general, regional, local, sacral, caudal, lumbar, endotracheal,
epidural, and analgesia (pain controlled)
5. 
moderate or conscious sedation
6. 
Medicine
Exercise 12-2
1. 
P2
2. 
P3
3. 
99116
4. 
actual
5. 
Stop
6. 
start
Exercise 12-3
1. 
-22
2. 
-23
3. 
-AD
4. 
-QS
5. 
-QX
Exercise 12-4
1. 
01999
 (Anesthesia, Unlisted Services and Procedures)
2. 
Anesthesia, Thyroid, 
00322
3. 
Anesthesia, Cesarean Delivery, 
01961
4. 
Anesthesia, Prostate, or Anesthesia, Transurethral Procedures,
00914
5. 
Anesthesia, Cleft Palate Repair, 
00172
6. 
Anesthesia, Achilles Tendon Repair, 
01472
7. 
$106.95
 (B = 3, T = 1, M = 1; total 5; 5 $21.39)
8. 
a. 
$220.50
 (B = 5, T = 4, M = 0; total 9; 9 $24.50)
b. 
$192.96
 (B = 5, T = 4, M = 0; total 9; 9 $21.44)
9. 
a. 
$214.80
 (B = 7, T = 2, M = 1; total 10; 10 $21.48)
b. 
$236.28
 (B = 7, T = 3, M = 1; total 11; 11 $21.48)
Chapter 13
Exercise 13-1
1. 
20999
2. 
69949
3. 
17999
4. 
27899
5. 
64999
6. 
67999
Exercise 13-2
1. 
pre-, intra-, and postoperative services, or similar wording
2. 
no
3. 
no
Exercise 13-3
1. 
10021
 (Fine Needle Aspiration, Diagnostic)
2. 
10022
 (Fine Needle Aspiration, Diagnostic), 
76942
 (Ultrasound,
Guidance, Needle Biopsy)
Chapter 14
Exercise 14-1
1. 
11056
 (Lesion, Skin, Paring/Curettement)
B07.8
 (Wart, common)
2. 
11200
 (Lesion, Skin Tags, Removal)
L91.8
 (Tag, skin)
3. 
11311
 (Lesion, Skin, Shaving)
L98.9
 (Lesion, skin)
Exercise 14-2
1. 
13132
 (Repair, Wound, Complex)
S61.401A
 (Wound, open, hand)
2. 
13101
 for complex repair of abdomen (Repair, Wound, Complex);
12004-59
 for 12-cm simple repair of back, forearm, and neck added
together (Repair, Wound, Simple). (Note that the same types of repair
are combined—back (trunk), forearm (extremities), and neck are all
included in the code description for 12004.)
3. 
13121
 for the 5.6 cm complex forearm repair (Wound, Repair, Arm,
Complex); 
12032-59
 for the 5.1 cm intermediate forearm repair
(Wound, Repair, Arm, Intermediate); 
12002-59
 for the 3.1 cm simple
scalp repair (Repair, Wound, Simple)
4. 
Cheek graft: 
15120
 (Skin Grafts and Flaps, Split Grafts)
Upper chest: 
15100-51, 15101
 (Skin Grafts and
Flaps, Split Grafts) [no modifier on add-on code
15101]
Site prep, cheek, 100 cm
2
: 
15004-51
 (Skin Grafts
and Flaps, Recipient Site Preparation)
Site prep, chest, 200 cm
2
: 
15002-51, 15003
 (Skin
Grafts and Flaps, Recipient Site Preparation)
[no modifier on add-on code 15003]
Note: If this claim were submitted to Medicare,
modifier -51 would not be appended on the site
preparation codes.
5. 
14041
 (Skin, Adjacent Tissue Transfer)
6. 
14040
 (Skin, Adjacent Tissue Transfer) (Note that a Z-plasty is a
form of adjacent tissue transfer. The excision is included in the
adjacent tissue transfer code.)
7. 
15732
 (Skin, Myocutaneous Flaps) (Note that modifier -58 may also
be used if the procedure was a staged procedure.)
8. 
Week 1: 
16025 × 5
 (Burns, Debridement/Dressing)
Weeks 2 and 3: 
16025 × 6
 (Burns,
Debridement/Dressing) (Some payers would
allow you to submit all treatments together
with 
16025 × 11
.)
Exercise 14-3
1. 
17110
 (Destruction, Lesion, Skin, Benign) (If a specific anatomic area
was indicated, you could report the destruction with a more specific
code. For example, 56501 for destruction of a lesion of the vulva.)
2. 
17000
 (Destruction, Lesion, Skin, Premalignant), 
17003 × 13
(Destruction, Lesion, Skin, Premalignant)
L57.0
 (Keratosis, actinic)
3. 
17311
 (Mohs Micrographic Surgery)
Exercise 14-4
1. 
19000
 (Breast, Cyst, Puncture Aspiration)
2. 
19303
 and 
19303-50
 or 
19303-50
 or 
19303-RT
 and 
19303-LT
 (Breast,
Removal, Simple, Complete)
3. 
19307-RT
 (Breast, Removal, Modified Radical)
4. 
19287-LT
 (Placement, Needle Wire, Breast)
5. 
19350-RT
 (Breast, Reconstruction, Nipple, Areola)
Chapter 15
Exercise 15-1
1. 
21310
 (Nasal Bone, Fracture, Closed Treatment)
2. 
21820
 (Sternum, Fracture, Closed Treatment)
3. 
28675
 (Dislocation, Interphalangeal Joint, Toe, Open Treatment)
4. 
27792
 (Fracture, Fibula, Open Treatment)
5. 
27500
 (Fracture, Femur, Closed Treatment)
6. 
27235
 (Fracture, Femur, Percutaneous Fixation)
7. 
23670
 (Fracture, Humerus, with Dislocation, Open Treatment)
S42.256A
 (Fracture, humerus, upper end, great
tuberosity)
8. 
21453
 (Fracture, Mandible, Closed Treatment, Interdental Fixation)
S02.609A
 (Fracture, mandible [lower jaw] [bone])
9. 
25606
 (Fracture, Radius, Percutaneous Fixation)
S52.509A
 (Fracture, radius, lower end)
10. 
27840
 (Ankle, Dislocation, Closed Treatment)
S93.06XA
 (Dislocation, ankle)
Exercise 15-2
1. 
20103
 (Wound, Exploration, Penetrating Extremity)
2. 
20838-RT
 (Replantation, Foot)
3. 
21015
 (Radial Resection, Tumor, Face)
4. 
20974
 (Electrical Stimulation, Bone Healing, Noninvasive)
5. 
20206
 (Biopsy, Muscle)
G71.11
 (Dystrophy, muscular, congenital,
myotonic)
6. 
20600
 (Aspiration, Joint)
M19.049
 (Osteoarthritis, primary, hand joint)
Exercise 15-3
1. 
29065-58
 (Cast, Shoulder to Hand); 
99070
 or 
A4580-A4590
 or 
O4005-
O4008
 (Supply, Materials)
2. 
29425
 (Cast, Ambulatory, Walking)
3. 
29705
 (Cast, Removal)
4. 
29530
 (Strapping, Knee)
5. 
29345
 (Cast, Thigh to Toes); 
99070
 or 
A4580-A4590
 or 
O4005-O4008
(Supply, Materials)
Exercise 15-4
1. 
29898
 (Arthroscopy, Surgical, Ankle)
2. 
29870
 (Arthroscopy, Diagnostic, Knee)
3. 
29805
 (Arthroscopy, Diagnostic, Shoulder)
4. 
29850
 (Fracture, Knee, Arthroscopic Treatment)
5. 
29891
 (Arthroscopy, Surgical, Ankle)
Chapter 16
Exercise 16-1
1. 
31256
 (Antrostomy, Sinus, Maxillary)
2. 
31530
 (Laryngoscopy, Removal, Foreign Body)
3. 
31628
 (Bronchoscopy, Biopsy)
4. 
32601
 (Thoracoscopy, Diagnostic, without Biopsy)
5. 
32663
 (Thoracoscopy, Surgical, with Lobectomy)
Exercise 16-2
1. 
30100
 (Biopsy, Nose, Intranasal)
J34.89
 (Lesion, nose [internal])
2. 
30420
 (Rhinoplasty, Primary)
J34.2
 (Deviation [in], nasal septum)
3. 
30901
 (Hemorrhage, Control, Nasal, Simple)
R04.0
 (Hemorrhage, nose)
4. 
30520
 (Septoplasty)
5. 
30300
 (Removal, Foreign Body, Nose)
Exercise 16-3
1. 
31000
 and 
31000-50
 (Sinuses, Maxillary, Irrigation)
2. 
31070-LT
 (Sinusotomy, Frontal Sinus, Exploratory)
3. 
31090
 (Sinusotomy, Combined)
4. 
31030-RT
 (Sinusotomy, Maxillary)
5. 
31040
 (Ptergomaxillary Fossa, Incision)
J01.01
 (Antritis, maxilla, recurrent)
Exercise 16-4
1. 
31320
 (Laryngotomy, Diagnostic)
2. 
31580
 (Laryngoplasty, Laryngeal Web)
3. 
31500
 (Endotracheal Tube, Intubation)
4. 
31368
 (Laryngectomy, Subtotal)
C10.1
 (Neoplasm, glosso-epiglottic fold[s],
Malignant Primary)
5. 
31390
 (Pharyngolaryngectomy)
C14.0
 (Neoplasm, pharynx region, Malignant
Primary)
Exercise 16-5
1. 
31605
 (Tracheostomy, Emergency)
2. 
31785
 (Excision, Tumor, Trachea)
3. 
31717
 (Bronchial Brush Biopsy, with Catheterization)
4. 
31600
 (Tracheostomy, Planned)
J96.00
 (Failure, respiration, acute)
5. 
31717
 (Bronchial Brush Biopsy, with Catheterization)
J21.9
 (Bronchiolitis [acute])
Exercise 16-6
1. 
32100
 (Lung, Exploration)
2. 
32405
 (Biopsy, Lung, Needle)
3. 
32480
 (Lobectomy, Lung), 
32501
 (Bronchoplasty) (Note that code
32501 is an add-on code and does not require modifier -51.)
4. 
32503
 (Lung, Tumor, Resection)
C34.10
 (Neoplasm, lung, upper lobe [unspecified
side], Malignant Primary)
5. 
32200
 (Pneumonostomy)
J85.2
 (Abscess, lung)
Chapter 17
Exercise 17-1
1. 
invasive
2. 
internal
3. 
Medicine, Surgery, Radiology (any order)
4. 
interventional
5. 
electrophysiology
6. 
nuclear
Exercise 17-2
1. 
33207
 (Pacemaker, Heart, Insertion)
2. 
33216-78
 (Pacemaker, Heart, Insertion, Electrode). Note that -78 is
appended because the patient is in a postoperative period. The patient
had a single-lead pacemaker implanted. The replacement of the lead
wire is reported as insertion of a new electrode, the removal of the
defective electrode is not separately reported.
3. 
33214
 (Pacemaker, Upgrade)
4. 
33010
 (Pericardiocentesis)
J81.0
 (Edema, lung, acute), 
I30.0
 (Pericarditis,
acute, nonspecific)
5. 
33120
 (Tumor, Heart, Excision)
C38.0
 (Neoplasm, heart, Malignant Primary)
Exercise 17-3
1. 
33430
 (Mitral Valve, Replacement)
2. 
33405
 (Aortic Valve Replacement, Open, with Prosthesis) (Note that
a prosthetic valve, and not a homograft valve, is used.)
3. 
33261
 (Arrhythmogenic Focus, Heart, Ablation)
I49.8
 (Arrhythmia, specified NEC)
4. 
33282
 (Implantation, Cardiac Event Recorder)
R00.2
 (Palpitations [heart]), 
R42
 (Dizziness)
Exercise 17-4
1. 
33511
 (Bypass Graft, Venous, Coronary)
2A. 
33534
 (Coronary Artery Bypass Graft, Arterial)
2B. 
33519
 (Coronary Artery Bypass Graft, Arterial-Venous)
I25.10
 (Disease, heart, ischemic, atherosclerotic)
3. 
33533
 (Bypass Graft, Arterial, Coronary) and 
33519
 (Bypass Graft,
Arterial-Venous, Coronary)
I25.10
 (Disease, heart, ischemic, atherosclerotic),
I11.9
 (Hypertension, hypertensive, heart
[disease])
Exercise 17-5
1. 
34201
 (Thrombectomy, Aortoiliac Artery)
2. 
34001
 (Embolectomy, Carotid Artery)
3. 
35875
 (Thrombectomy, Bypass Graft, Other than Hemodialysis
Graft or Fistula)
T82.868A
 (Complication[s], graft, vascular,
thrombosis)
Exercise 17-6
1. 
35506
 (Artery, Carotid, Bypass Graft)
2. 
35556
 (Bypass Graft, Venous, Femoral-Popliteal)
3. 
35650
 (Bypass Graft, Venous, Axillary-Axillary)
4. 
35141
 (Aneurysm Repair, Femoral Artery)
I72.4
 (Aneurysm, femoral [artery])
5. 
36246-LT
 or 
36248-RT
 (Catheterization, Legs), 
75716-26
(Angiography, Leg Artery)
I73.9
 (Disease, peripheral, vascular NOS)
Exercise 17-7
1. 
92950
 (CPR [Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation])
2. 
93015
 (Stress Tests, Cardiovascular)
3. 
92920-RC, 92921-LD
 (Angioplasty, Percutaneous Transluminal,
Coronary)
4. 
93278-26
 (Electrocardiography, Signal-Averaged)
I47.2
 (Tachycardia, ventricular)
Exercise 17-8
1. 
93451-26
 (Cardiac, Catheterization, Right Heart)
2. 
93458
 (Cardiac, Catheterization, Left Heart, with Ventriculography)
I25.110
 (Arteriosclerosis, coronary [artery], native
vessel, with, angina pectoris, unstable)
3. 
False; they are already bundled into the codes.
4. 
True
5. 
False; some codes are modifier -51-exempt.
Exercise 17-9
1. 
93600-26
 (Electrophysiology Procedure)
2. 
93620-26, 93622-26
 (Electrophysiology Procedure)
R55
 (Syncope, vasovagal)
Exercise 17-10
1. 
Injection procedure for angiography 
36225
 (Angiography,
Innominate Artery); contrast material 
99070
 (Supply, Materials)
2. 
75716-26
 (Angiography, Leg Artery)
3. 
75572-26
 (CT Scan, Heart, Evaluation, for Structure and
Morphology)
4. 
75563-26
 (Magnetic Resonance Imaging [MRI], Heart)
I50.9
 (Failure, heart, congestive), 
I49.3
 (Premature,
contraction, ventricular)
Chapter 18
Exercise 18-1
1. 
38550
 (Lymph Nodes, Hygroma Cystic Axillary/Cervical, Excision)
D18.1
 (Hygroma)
2. 
38100
 (Splenectomy, Total)
E75.22
 (Splenomegaly, Gaucher’s)
3. 
38200
 (Splenoportography, Injection Procedures)
4. 
38241
 (Transplantation, Bone Marrow)
Exercise 18-2
1. 
39000
 (Mediastinum, Exploration)
C38.3
 (Neoplasm, mediastinum, mediastinal,
Malignant, Primary)
2. 
39220
 (Mediastinum, Resection, Tumor)
D15.2
 (Neoplasm, mediastinum, mediastinal,
Benign)
Chapter 19
Exercise 19-1
1. 
vermilionectomy
2. 
gallbladder
3. 
10.2 (4 × 2.54)
4. 
40527
 (Repair, Cleft Lip)
Q36.9
 (Cleft, lip)
5. 
40654
 (Repair, Lip)
C00.3
 (Table of Neoplasms, lip, internal, upper,
Malignant Primary)
6. 
40800
 (Mouth, Hematoma, Incision and Drainage)
7. 
41252
 (Tongue, Repair, Laceration). Note that the measurement of
the laceration was stated in inches and must be converted to
centimeters (1.5 in × 2.54 = 3.8 cm).
Exercise 19-2
1. 
42826
 (Tonsillectomy)
J35.01
 (Tonsillitis, hypertrophic)
2. 
42900
 (Suture, Pharynx, Wound)
3. 
43045
 (Esophagotomy)
4. 
43101
 (Esophagus, Lesion, Excision)
5. 
43450
 (Dilation, Esophagus)
Exercise 19-3
1. 
surgical communication from the colon to the rectum
2. 
surgical communication from the ileum to the body surface
3. 
surgical communication from the large intestine to the body surface
4. 
surgical communication between segments of intestine
5. 
44141
 (Colon, Excision, Partial)
C18.9
 (Neoplasm, intestine, large, colon,
Malignant Primary)
6. 
44120
 (Enterectomy, Small Intestine)
Exercise 19-4
1. 
44960
 (Excision, Appendix)
K35.2
 (Appendicitis, with, peritonitis, generalized
[perforation, or rupture])
2. 
45331
 (Sigmoidoscopy, Biopsy). The description states biopsy,
single or multiple, so only one code is used for multiple (three)
biopsies.
3. 
45385
 (Colonoscopy, Flexible, Removal, Polyp)
4. 
45331
 (Endoscopy, Colon-Sigmoid, Biopsy)
Exercise 19-5
1. 
47600
 (Cholecystectomy, Excision). Note that the exploratory
laparotomy is not coded, as it turns into the surgical approach once
the cholecystectomy is performed.
2. 
47480
 (Cholecystotomy, Open)
3. 
49565
 (Hernia Repair, Incisional, Recurrent), 
49568
 (Implantation,
Mesh, Hernia Repair). Note that the mesh code can be used only with
incisional hernias, and it is stated to “list separately, ” so a -51
modifier is not necessary.
4. 
49507
 (Hernia Repair, Inguinal, Incarcerated)
5. 
48155
 (Pancreatectomy, Total)
6. 
46257
 (Hemorrhoidectomy, Simple, with Fissurectomy). Note that
46220 (Fissurectomy, Anus) and 46080 (Sphincterotomy, Anal) are not
reported as they are both bundled into code 46257.
Chapter 20
Exercise 20-1
1. 
50065
 (Nephrolithotomy). Note that the term “secondary” means
that the procedure is being repeated. Some may code this 50060-76,
but this would not be correct because there is a more accurate code to
assign.
2. 
50435-LT
 (Nephrostomy, Change Tube)
3. 
50590-RT
 (Lithotripsy, Kidney), 
52310-RT
 (Cystourethroscopy,
Removal, Urethral Stent)
Exercise 20-2
1. 
50630-LT
 (Ureterolithotomy)
2. 
50780-50
 (Ureteroneocystostomy) Modifier -50 indicates a bilateral
procedure.
3. 
50955-RT
 (Ureter, Endoscopy, Biopsy), 
50684-RT
 (Ureter, Injection,
Radiologic), 
74425
 (X-Ray, Urinary Tract)
Exercise 20-3
1. 
51100
 (Aspiration, Bladder)
2. 
52332-RT
 (Cystourethroscopy, Insertion, Indwelling Ureteral Stent)
3. 
52332-LT
 (Ureter, Endoscopy, Insertion, Stent), 
74420-26
(Urography, Retrograde)
4. 
51840
 (Urethropexy)
5. 
52320-LT
 (Ureter, Endoscopy, Removal, Calculus), 
74420-26
(Urography, Retrograde)
Exercise 20-4
1. 
53520
 (Repair, Urethra, Stoma)
2. 
53405
 (Urethroplasty, Second Stage)
Exercise 20-5
1. 
54065
 (Penis, Lesion, Destruction, Extensive)
A63.0
 (Condyloma)
2. 
54415
 (Removal, Prosthesis, Penis)
Exercise 20-6
1. 
54520-50
 (Orchiectomy, Simple) (Note that the terms “simple” and
“radical” are based on the interpretation of the physician.)
2. 
54505-50
 (Biopsy, Testes)
Exercise 20-7
1. 
54865
 (Epididymis, Exploration, Biopsy)
N50.22
 (Pain, scrotum)
(Note that even though the question states
without biopsy, the CPT code states with or
without biopsy, so this would be the correct
code to assign.)
2. 
55000
 (Tunica Vaginalis, Hydrocele, Aspiration)
3. 
55400-50
 (Vas Deferens, Repair, Suture), 
69990
 (Operating
Microscope)
Exercise 20-8
1. 
55845
 (Prostatectomy, Retropubic, Radical)
C61
 (Neoplasm, prostate, Malignant Primary)
2. 
53852
 (Transurethral Procedure, Prostate, Thermotherapy,
Radiofrequency)
Chapter 21
Exercise 21-1
1. 
57061
 (Destruction, Lesion, Vagina, Simple)
2. 
56605, 56606 × 2
 (Vulva, Perineum, Biopsy) (Note that the code
56605 is for the first lesion, and 56606 is for each additional lesion.)
3. 
57305
 (Vagina, Repair, Fistula, Rectovaginal)
4. 
57520
 (Cervix, Conization) (Note that dilation and curettage is not
coded separately because it is included in the description of the
conization.)
5. 
58662-RT
 (Cystectomy, Ovarian, Laparoscopic)
6. 
c
7. 
b
8. 
d
9. 
a
Exercise 21-2
1. 
59151
 (Laparoscopy, Ectopic Pregnancy with Salpingectomy and/or
Oophorectomy)
2. 
59409
 (Vaginal Delivery, Delivery only); 
59412
 (External Cephalic
Version) (Note that the version is stated “list in addition”; therefore,
modifier -51 is not necessary.)
3. 
59320
 (Cerclage, Cervix, Vaginal)
Chapter 22
Exercise 22-1
1. 
60200
 (Thyroid Gland, Cyst, Excision)
2. 
60280
 (Thyroglossal Duct, Cyst, Excision)
3. 
60522
 (Thymectomy, Sternal Split/Transthoracic Approach)
4. 
60600
 (Carotid Body, Tumor, Excision)
5. 
60210
 (Thyroid Gland, Excision, Partial)
6. 
60650
 (Adrenal Gland, Excision, Laparoscopy)
7. 
60505
 (Excision, Parathyroid Gland), 
60512
 (Parathyroid Gland,
Autotransplant)
8. 
60502
 (Exploration, Parathyroid Gland). The partial thymectomy is
listed as a separate procedure and is not reported.
9. 
60605
 (Carotid Body, Tumor, Excision)
Exercise 22-2
1. 
61154
 (Burr Hole, for, Drainage, Hematoma)
I62.00
 (Hematoma, subdural, nontraumatic)
2. 
61312
 (Craniectomy, Evacuation of Hematoma)
S06.5X0A
 (Injury, intracranial, subdural
hemorrhage, traumatic)
3. 
61607
 Definitive Procedure: (Skull Base Surgery, Middle Cranial
Fossa, Extradural), 
61591-51
 Approach Procedure: (Skull Base
Surgery, Middle Cranial Fossa, Infratemporal Post-Auricular
Approach)
C71.9
 (Neoplasm, brain, Malignant Primary)
4. 
62258
 (Shunt, Brain, Replacement)
Q03.9
 (Hydrocephalus, congenital)
Chapter 23
Exercise 23-1
1. 
65930-LT
 (Eye, Removal, Blood Clot)
2. 
67318-RT
 (Strabismus, Repair, Superior Oblique Muscle)
3. 
67145-LT
 (Retina, Repair, Prophylaxis, Detachment)
4. 
65772-RT
 (Cornea, Relaxing, Incision, Astigmatism)
5. 
65105-LT
 (Removal, Eye, with Implant, Muscles Attached)
Exercise 23-2
1. 
69801-LT
 (Labyrinthotomy, Transcranial)
2. 
69436
 and 
69436-50
 (Tympanostomy, General Anesthesia)
3. 
69950-LT
 (Vestibular Nerve, Section, Transcranial Approach)
4. 
69310-RT
 (Reconstruction, Auditory Canal, External)
5. 
69820-RT
 (Ear, Inner Ear, Semicircular Canal)
Exercise 23-3
1. 
exostosis
2. 
otoplasty
3. 
cholesteatoma
4. 
69990
Chapter 24
Exercise 24-1
1. 
aorta
2. 
joint
3. 
biliary system and pancreas
4. 
bile ducts
5. 
urinary bladder
6. 
lacrimal sac or tear duct sac
7. 
duodenum or first part of the small intestine
8. 
heart or heart walls or neighboring tissues
9. 
subarachnoid space and ventricles of the brain
10. 
epididymis with contrast material
11. 
liver
12. 
uterine cavity and fallopian tubes
13. 
larynx
14. 
lymphatic vessels and node
15. 
spinal cord
16. 
ureter and renal pelvis
17. 
salivary duct and branches
18. 
sinus or sinus tract
19. 
spleen
20. 
any part of the urinary system
21. 
vein and tributaries
22. 
seminal vesicles
Exercise 24-2
1. 
position
2. 
projection
3. 
anteroposterior
4. 
posteroanterior
5. 
right anterior oblique
6. 
left posterior oblique
7. 
dorsal
8. 
ventral
9. 
right lateral recumbent
10. 
dorsal decubitus, left lateral
Exercise 24-3
1. 
separate
2. 
MUE or Medically Unlikely Edits, or Medically Unbelievable Edits
3. 
Diagnostic Radiology; Diagnostic Ultrasound; Breast,
Mammography; Bone/Joint Studies; Radiation Oncology; or Nuclear
Medicine (in any order)
Exercise 24-4
1. 
77066
 (Mammography)
2. 
76499
 (Radiology, Unlisted Services and Procedures, Radiographic)
3. 
75605
 (Aortography, Aorta Imaging)
Exercise 24-5
1. 
Head and Neck
2. 
Chest
3. 
Abdomen and Retroperitoneum
4. 
Spinal Canal
5. 
Pelvis
6. 
Genitalia
7. 
Extremities
8. 
Ultrasonic Guidance Procedures
9. 
Other Procedures
Exercise 24-6
1. 
76800
 (Ultrasound, Spine)
2. 
76604
 (Ultrasound, Chest)
3. 
76700
 (Ultrasound, Abdomen)
4. 
76816, 76816-59
 (Ultrasound, Pregnant Uterus)
O30.003
 (Pregnancy, twin)
5. 
76818
 (Ultrasound, Fetus)
O24.019
 (Pregnancy, complicated by diabetes
(mellitus), pre-exiting, type 1)
Exercise 24-7
1. 
77290
 (Radiation Therapy, Field Set-Up)
2. 
77261
 (Radiation Therapy, Planning)
Exercise 24-8
1. 
77333
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Device)
2. 
77316
 (Brachytherapy, Planning, Isodose Plan)
3. 
77306
 (Radiation Therapy, Dose Plan)
C61
 (Neoplasm, prostate, Malignant Primary)
Exercise 24-9
1. 
77402
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Delivery)
2. 
77401
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Delivery)
3. 
77412
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Delivery)
4. 
77407
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Delivery)
5. 
77412
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Delivery)
C79.51
 (Neoplasm, bone, spine, Malignant
Secondary), 
C80.1
 (Neoplasm, unknown site or
unspecified, Malignant Primary)
Exercise 24-10
1. 
77427
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Management, Weekly)
2. 
77499
 (Radiation Therapy, Treatment Management, Unlisted
Services and Procedures)
Exercise 24-11
1. 
77761
 (Brachytherapy, Intracavity Application)
2. 
77778
 (Brachytherapy, Interstitial Radioelement Application)
3. 
77789
 (Brachytherapy, Surface Application)
C56.9
 (Neoplasm, ovary, Malignant Primary)
Exercise 24-12
1. 
Gastrointestinal System
2. 
Endocrine System
3. 
Hematopoietic, Reticuloendothelial, and Lymphatic System
4. 
Musculoskeletal System
5. 
Nervous System
Chapter 25
Exercise 25-1
1. 
80076
 (Therapeutic Organ or Disease Oriented Panel, Hepatic
Function Panel)
B18.1
 (Hepatitis, type, B, chronic)
2. 
seven
3. 
yes
4. 
yes
Exercise 25-2
1. 
80306
 (Therapeutic Drug Assay, Cocaine)
2. 
80162
 (Therapeutic Drug Assay, Digoxin)
3. 
80150
 (Therapeutic Drug Assay, Amikacin)
D70.9
 (Neutropenia, [immune]), 
R50.81
 (Fever,
due to, conditions classified elsewhere)
The notes in the Tabular after D70 state to “Use
additional code” for any associated fever
(R50.81).
The notes in the Tabular after 288.0 state to “Use
additional code” for any associated fever
(780.61).
4. 
80178
 (Therapeutic Drug Assay, Lithium)
F31.9
 (Manic-depressive)
Exercise 25-3
1. 
81003
 (Urinalysis, Automated)
2. 
81015
 (Urinalysis, Microscopic)
3. 
82040
 (Albumin, Serum)
4. 
82247
 (Bilirubin, Total, Direct)
5. 
82800
 (Blood Gases, pH)
J96.90
 (Failure, respiratory)
6. 
84300
 (Sodium, Urine)
I50.9
 (Failure, heart, congestive)
7. 
84550
 (Uric Acid, Blood)
M10.00
 (Gout, idiopathic)
Exercise 25-4
1. 
85027
 (Hemogram, Automated)
2. 
85025
 (Hemogram, Automated)
D62
 (Anemia, blood loss, acute)
3. 
85041
 (Red Blood Cell, Count)
4. 
85097
 (Bone Marrow, Smear)
C95.01
 (Leukemia, unspecified cell type, acute)
Exercise 25-5
1. 
86039
 (Antibody, Antinuclear)
2. 
86063
 (Antibody, Antistreptolysin O)
3. 
86156
 (Cold Agglutinin)
J06.9
 (Infection, respiratory, upper)
Exercise 25-6
1. 
86900
 (Blood Typing, Serologic, ABO only); 
86901
 (Blood Typing,
Serologic, Rh)
2. 
86945 × 3
 (Blood Products, Irradiation)
Exercise 25-7
1. 
87536
 (Microbiology)
2. 
87651
 (Microbiology)
R51
 (Headache), 
R50.9
 (Fever)
3. 
87512
 (Microbiology); 
87530
 (Microbiology); 
87482
 (Microbiology)
N76.0
 (Vaginitis, bacterial)
4. 
87555
 (Microbiology); 
87528
 (Microbiology); 
87490
 (Microbiology)
5. 
87086
 (Culture, Bacteria, Urine)
R35.0
 (Frequency, micturition)
Exercise 25-8
1. 
88309
 (Pathology, Surgical, Gross and Micro Exam Level VI)
2. 
88309
 (Pathology, Surgical, Gross and Micro Exam Level VI)
3. 
88305
 (Pathology, Surgical, Gross and Micro Exam Level IV)
4. 
88302
 (Pathology, Surgical, Gross and Micro Exam Level II)
Chapter 26
Exercise 26-1
1. 
90713
 (Vaccines and Toxoids, Poliovirus, Live); 
90471
(Immunization Administration, One Vaccine/Toxoid)
Z23
 (Immunization, encounter for)
2. 
90715
 (Vaccines and Toxoids, Tetanus, Diphtheria, Acellular
Pertussis); 
90713
 (Vaccines and Toxoids, Polio Virus, Live); 
90471
 for
first injection; and 
90472
 for the administration service
(Administration, Immunization, Each Additional Vaccine/Toxoid)
Z23
 (Immunization, encounter for)
3. 
99392-25
 (Preventive Medicine, Established Patient); 
90713
(Vaccines, Poliovirus, Inactivated, Intramuscular or Subcutaneous);
90702
 (Vaccines, Diphtheria, Tetanus [DT]); 
90460
 (Immunization
Administration, One Vaccine/Toxoid, with Counseling), 
90461
(Immunization Administration, Each Additional Vaccine/Toxoid, with
Counseling),
Z00.129
 (Examination, child), 
Z23
 (Immunization,
encounter for), 
Z71.89
 (Counseling, medical
[for], specified reason NEC)
Note that E/M code 99392 is used here because the
well-baby checkup service provided is
significant and separate from the injection
service.
4. 
90658
 (Vaccines, Influenza); 
90471
 (Administration, Immunization,
One Vaccine/Toxoid)
Z23
 (Immunization, encounter for)
5. 
99202-25
 (Office and/or Other Outpatient Services, New Patient);
90700
, combination code for DTP (Vaccines, Diphtheria, Tetanus);
90471
 (Immunization Administration, One Vaccine/Toxoid)
E03.9
 (Hypothyroidism [acquired]), 
Z23
(Immunization, encounter for)
Note: E/M code 99202 is assigned here because the
E/M service provided was significant and
separate from the injection service.
6. 
99392-25
 (Preventive Medicine, Established Patient); 
90702
(Vaccines, Diphtheria, Tetanus [DT]); 
90460
 (Immunization
Administration, One Vaccine/Toxoid, with Counseling), 
90461
(Immunization Administration, Each Additional Vaccine/Toxoid, with
Counseling)
Z00.129
 (Examination, child), 
Z23
 (Immunization,
encounter for), 
Z71.89
 (Counseling, medical
[for], specified reason NEC)
Note that an E/M code, 99392, is used here
because the E/M service provided was
significant and was separate from the injection
service.
7. 
90658
 (Vaccines, Influenza, Trivalent), 
90471
 (Immunization
Administration, One Vaccine/Toxoid)
Z23
 (Immunization, encounter for)
Exercise 26-2
1. 
90791
 (Psychiatric Diagnosis, Evaluation)
F22
 (Psychosis, paranoid)
2. 
96101 × 2
 (Psychiatric Diagnosis, Psychological Testing)
F91.1
 (Disturbance, conduct, undersocialized)
3. 
90885
 (Psychiatric Diagnosis, Evaluation of Records or Reports)
F93.8
 (Disturbance, emotions specific to childhood
and adolescence, with anxiety and fearfulness)
4. 
90837
 (Psychotherapy, Individual Patient)
F32.9
 (Depression), 
R25.1
 (Tremor)
Exercise 26-3
1. 
90875
 (Biofeedback, Psychophysiological)
F41.1
 (Anxiety, generalized), 
F51.01
 (Insomnia,
idiopathic), 
F17.218
 (Dependence, nicotine,
cigarettes)
2. 
90901
 (Training, Biofeedback)
I11.9
 (Hypertension, heart)
Exercise 26-4
1. 
90955
 (Dialysis, End-Stage Renal Disease)
N18.6
 (Disease, renal, end-stage [failure]), 
Z99.2
(Status, dialysis)
2. 
90935
 (Dialysis, Hemodialysis)
N17.9
 (Failure, renal, acute)
3. 
90947
 (Dialysis, Peritoneal)
N17.0
 (Failure, renal, with, tubular necrosis)
4. 
within the lining of the abdominal cavity
5. 
filtration of blood and waste products through a filter outside the
body
6. 
end-stage renal disease
Exercise 26-5
1. 
91038
 (Esophagus, Acid Reflux Tests)
K21.9
 (Reflux, gastroesophageal)
2. 
91117
 (Motility Study, Colon)
3. 
43754
 (Intubation, Specimen Collection, Gastric)
R10.9
 (Pain, abdominal), 
R63.0
 (Appetite, lack or
loss)
4. 
spontaneous movement study
5. 
pressure measurements
Exercise 26-6
1. 
92014
 (Ophthalmology, Diagnostic, Eye Exam, Established Patient)
2. 
92071
 (Contact Lens Services, Fittings and Prescription)
3. 
92100
 (Ophthalmology, Diagnostic, Tonometry, Serial)
H40.009
 (Glaucoma, borderline)
4. 
92004
 (Ophthalmology, Diagnostic, Eye Exam, New Patient)
E11.359
 (Diabetes, type 2, with, retinopathy,
proliferative)
Exercise 26-7
1. 
92592
 (Hearing Aid Check)
2. 
92551
 (Audiologic Function Tests, Screening)
3. 
92511
 (Nasopharyngoscopy)
R04.2
 (Sputum, blood stained)
4. 
92512
 (Nasal Function Study)
R06.89
 (Hypoventilation)
Exercise 26-8
1. 
93924
 (Doppler Scan, Extremeties)
I73.9
 (Claudication, intermittent)
2. 
93980
 (Vascular Studies, Penile Vessels)
N52.9
 (Impotence, organic origin)
Exercise 26-9
1. 
94620
 (Pulmonology, Diagnostic, Stress Test, Pulmonary)
2. 
94150
 (Vital Capacity Measurement)
3. 
94060
 (Pulmonology, Diagnostic, Spirometry); 
99070
 (Supply,
materials)
R05
 (Cough), 
F17.200
 (Dependence, nicotine)
Exercise 26-10
1. 
95065
 (Allergy Tests, Nose Allergy)
2. 
95004 × 10
 (Allergy Tests, Skin Tests, Allergen Extract) (Note that
one unit is used for each test.)
3. 
95115
 (Allergen Immunotherapy, Allergen, Injection)
J30.1
 (Allergy, ragweed)
4. 
95165 × 10
 (Allergen Immunotherapy, Antigens, Preparation and
Provision), 
95115
 (Allergen Immunotherapy, Allergenic Extracts,
Injection)
Exercise 26-11
1. 
nasal continuous positive airway pressure
2. 
peripheral arterial tonometry
3. 
maintenance of wakefulness test
4. 
electroencephalogram
5. 
electromyogram
6. 
electro-oculogram
7. 
95816
 (Neurology, Electroencephalogram (EEG))
G47.30
 (Apnea, sleep)
8. 
95863
 (Electromyography, Needle, Extremities)
R20.0
 (Numbness)
9. 
95851 × 2
 (both legs) (Range of Motion Test, Extremities or Trunk,
without Hands)
R27.8
 (Incoordination, muscular)
Exercise 26-12
1. 
96110
 (Developmental Test Screening)
F91.1
 (Disorder, conduct, childhood onset type)
2. 
96101-32
 (MMPI)
Z01.89
 (Test, specified NEC)
3. 
96116
 (Neurology, Higher Cerebral Function, Cognitive Function
Tests)
R53.83
 (Lethargy)
Exercise 26-13
1. 
96440
 (Chemotherapy, Pleural Cavity)
C34.90
 (Neoplasm, lung, unspecified site,
Malignant Primary)
2. 
96521
 (Chemotherapy, Pump Services, Portable)
C18.9
 (Neoplasm, intestine, large, colon,
Malignant Primary)
3. 
96401
 (Chemotherapy, Subcutaneous)
C43.59
 (Melanoma, skin, chest wall)
4. 
96413
 (Chemotherapy, Intravenous, Infusion)
C50.919
 (Neoplasm, breast, Malignant Primary),
C79.51
 (Neoplasm, bone, spine, Malignant
Secondary)
5. 
96450
 (Chemotherapy, CNS)
C71.9
 (Neoplasm, brain, Malignant Primary)
6. 
96372
 (Injection, Intramuscular, Therapeutic); 
J3420
 (Vitamin B12)
Exercise 26-14
1. 
99241-25
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient); 
96900
(Ultraviolet Light Therapy, for Dermatology)
L70.0
 (Acne, vulgaris)
2. 
99244-25
 (Consultation, Office and/or Other Outpatient); 
96913
(Photochemotherapy)
L13.9
 (Dermatosis, bullous)
Exercise 26-15
1. 
97010
 (Physical Medicine/Therapy/Occupational Therapy,
Modalities, Hot or Cold Pack)
2. 
97761 × 2
 (Physical Medicine/Therapy/Occupational Therapy,
Prosthetic Training)
3. 
97116 × 2
 (Physical Medicine/Therapy/Occupational Therapy,
Procedures, Gait Training)
I69.398
 (Sequelae, infarction, cerebral, specified
effect NEC)
(Note that the stand-alone code 97110 specifies
“each 15 minutes.”)
Exercise 26-16
1. 
98940
 (Chiropractic Treatment, Spinal, Extraspinal)
M25.552
 (Pain, joint, hip)
2. 
98925
 (Osteopathic Manipulation)
M54.5
 (Pain, lumbar region)
Exercise 26-17
1. 
99050
 (Special Services, After Hours Medical Services)
2. 
99000
 (Special Services, Specimen Handling)
3. 
99070
 (Special Services, Supply of Materials)
Chapter 27
Exercise 27-1
1. 
No answer required.
2. 
a. Pyelonephritis, acute
b. 
N10
c. 
no
d. 
N10
e. 
because flank pain and hematuria are
symptoms of pyelonephritis
Exercise 27-2
1. 
No answer required.
2. 
a. open fracture of the right humerus and right distal femur
b. 
Fracture, Traumatic
c. 
humerus
d. 
B
S42.301B
e. 
Yes, because the patient record did not
specify the exact location of the fracture of
the humerus, so the “unspecified part of the
humerus, open” is as specific as you can get
with the information that you have available.
f. 
femur
g. 
distal or distal end
h. 
see Fracture, femur, lower end
i. 
S72.40
j. 
S72.401B
Exercise 27-3
1. 
No answer necessary.
2. 
a. menorrhagia
b. 
N92.0
c. 
anemia
d. 
D62
Exercise 27-4
1. 
No answer necessary.
2. 
a. Fracture, traumatic
b. 
S32.000
c. 
C79 .51
Exercise 27-5
1. a. 
K80.10
 (Calculus, gallbladder, with, cholecystitis)
b. 
J18.9
 (Pneumonia)
c. 
Contraindicated
d. 
Z53.09
 (Procedure, not done, because of, contraindication)
2.a. 
2; sterilization and surgery not done
b. 
Z30.2
 (Encounter (for) sterilization)
c. 
Z53.29
 (Refusal of, treatment [because of], patient’s decision NEC)
Exercise 27-6
1. a. 
Postoperative ileus
b. 
K91.89
 (Complication, following, gastrointestinal, postoperative,
specified NEC)
c. 
yes
d. 
K56.0
 (Ileus, paralytic)
e. 
yes
C18.9
 (Neoplasm, colon, Malignant Primary),
Y83.2
 (Reaction, anastomosis)
2.a. 
Malfunction insulin pump
T85.614A
 (Complication, insulin pump,
mechanical, breakdown)
b. 
Z79.4
 (Long–term [current] drug therapy [use of], insulin)
c. 
E10.9
 (Diabetes, type 1)
Exercise 27-7
1.a. 
Probable aspiration pneumonia
b. 
J69.0
 (Pneumonia, aspiration)
c. 
yes
I69.391
 (Dysphagia, following, cerebral
infarction), 
I10
 (Hypertension, unspecified)
2. a. 
Suspected malignancy, right kidney
b. 
C64.1
 (Neoplasm, kidney [parenchymal], right, Malignant Primary)
c. 
yes
R31.9
 (Hematuria)
Exercise 27-8
1. 
a. Postoperative atrial fibrillation
b. 
I97.191
 (Complication[s], postprocedural,
cardiac functional disturbance, following
other surgery)
c. 
I48.91
 (Fibrillation, atrial or auricular
[established]), 
M32.14
 (Lupus, nephritis)
d. 
yes, 
0TB07ZX
 (Biopsy, kidney, percutaneous
[aspiration] [needle])
e. 
Y84.8
 (Complication [delayed] of or following
[medical or surgical procedure], biopsy),
Y92.238
 (External Cause Index: Place of
occurrence, hospital, specified)
Exercise 27-9
1. 
History of hysterectomy
2. 
History of peptic ulcer disease
3. 
Remote history of appendectomy
Exercise 27-10
1. 
Yes
2. 
No
Exercise 27-11
1. 
F
2. 
1
3. 
B
4. 
0
5. 
D
6. 
0
Exercise 27-12
1. 
7
2. 
L
3. 
M
4. 
G
5. 
N
6. 
1
7. 
R
8. 
5
9. 
T
10. 
8
Exercise 27-13
1. 
transfer
2. 
excision
3. 
inspection
4. 
transplantation
5. 
insertion
6. 
removal
7. 
fragmentation
8. 
occlusion
9. 
revision
10. 
release
Exercise 27-14
1. 
complete
2. 
expandable
3. 
multiaxial
4. 
standardized in terminology (in any order)
5. 
7
6. 
alphanumeric
7. 
34
8. 
O and I
9. 
procedure
APPENDIX C. Quick check answers
Note: The following reference manuals were used in preparing these
answers: 
2017 ICD-10-CM, 2017 ICD-10-PCS, 2017 HCPCS Level II
,
and 
Current Procedural Terminology, 2017
.
Current Procedural Terminology
 (CPT) is copyright 2016 American
Medical Association. All Rights Reserved. No fee schedules, basic
units, relative values, or related listings are included in CPT. The
AMA assumes no liability for the data contained herein. Applicable
FARS/DFARS restrictions apply to government use.
Note: For clarity we’ve used different colors to identify the codes
used in each answer. CPT codes are in blue, ICD-10-CM codes are in
red, HCPCS codes are in green, ICD-10-PCS codes are in black.
Chapter 1
Quick check 1-1
1. 
a
2. 
b, c, d
3. 
a
4. 
d
5. 
b
6. 
b, c, d
7. 
a, b, c
Chapter 2
Quick check 2-1
1. 
Y93.44
Quick check 2-2
1. 
Q28.1
2. 
R10.0
Quick check 2-3
1. 
098.
2. 
J00-J22
Chapter 3
Quick check 3-1
1. 
Z23
2. 
Z20
3. 
no
Quick check 3-2
1. 
Z03.810
2. 
medical
Chapter 4
Quick check 4-1
1. 
yes
2. 
no
Quick check 4-2
1. 
K86.1
2. 
K85.0
Chapter 5
Quick check 5-1
1. 
B95.62
2. 
vancomycin
3. 
Staphylococcus
Quick check 5-2
1. 
C95, Z85.6
2. 
M84.5
, neoplasm
Chapter 7
Quick check 7-1
1. 
14
2. 
14, 28
3. 
28
Quick check 7-2
1. 
Z37.0
2. 
first
3. 
complicating
Chapter 8
Quick check 8-1
1. 
True
Quick check 8-2
1. 
unlisted
Quick check 8-3
1. 
unlisted, III
Quick check 8-4
1. 
Use, CPT
Chapter 9
Quick check 9-1
1. 
J0120-J9999
2. 
a. HCPCS
Quick check 9-2
1. 
S
2. 
G
3. 
K
4. 
Q
Quick check 9-3
1. 
c
2. 
b
3. 
a
Quick check 9-4
1. 
True
Chapter 10
Quick check 10-1
1. 
five
Quick check 10-2
1. 
d. All of the above
Quick check 10-3
1. 
 Symbol preceding a code indicates it is modifier -51
exempt.
Quick check 10-4
1. 
No. Parenthetical notes following codes indicate modifier -63 is not
reported with these codes.
Chapter 11
Quick check 11-1
1. 
exceed, three
Quick check 11-2
1. 
True
Quick check 11-3
1. 
e. All of the above
Quick check 11-4
1. 
Yes
Quick check 11-5
1. 
outpatient
Quick check 11-6
1. 
Time
Quick check 11-7
1. 
Written or verbal request, written report
Quick check 11-8
1. 
Yes
Quick check 11-9
1. 
None
2. 
Yes
Quick check 11-10
1. 
Any two of:
■
 
Interpretation of cardiac output measure (93561,
93562)
■
 
Chest x-rays (71010, 71015, 71020)
■
 
Pulse Oximetry (94760, 94761, 94762)
■
 
Blood gases and information data stored in
computers (e.g., ECGs, blood pressures,
hematologic data [99090])
■
 
Temporary transcutaneous pacing (92953)
■
 
Ventilator management (94002-94004, 94660,
94662)
■
 
Vascular access procedures (36000, 36410, 36415,
36591, 36600)
Chapter 12
Quick check 12-1
1. 
In the CPT index, locate the main term “Injection, ” subterm “Spinal
Cord, ” then subterm “Blood” for code 62273 OR main term “Spinal
Cord, ” subterm “Injection, ” then subterm “Blood.”
Quick check 12-2
1. 
Anesthesia Guidelines
Quick check 12-3
1. 
QX: Indicates medical direction of a CRNA by a physician and is
appended to the CRNA portion of the charge.
QY: Indicates medical direction by an anesthesiologist of one CRNA
and is appended to the physician portion of the charge.
Chapter 13
Quick check 13-1
1. 
True (The listing is found before each subsection of the Surgery
section.)
Quick check 13-2
1. 
III
Quick check 13-3
1. 
False
Chapter 14
Quick check 14-1
1. 
False
Quick check 14-2
1. 
b
2. 
c
3. 
a
Quick check 14-3
1. 
b. reported separately
Chapter 15
Quick check 15-1
1. 
a. 
27506
Quick check 15-2
1. 
no
Quick check 15-3
1. 
anatomic
Quick check 15-4
1. 
-58
Chapter 16
Quick check 16-1
1. 
open, intranasal
Chapter 17
Quick check 17-1
1. 
The three main coronary arteries include: right coronary (RC), left
anterior descending (LD), and left circumflex (LC).
Quick check 17-2
1. 
CABG
Quick check 17-3
1. 
Appendix L
Quick check 17-4
1. 
c. saphenous vein graft
Chapter 18
Quick check 18-1
1. 
True
Quick check 18-2
1. 
-50
Chapter 19
Quick check 19-1
1. 
cross
Quick check 19-2
1. 
extent
Quick check 19-3
1. 
Any two of the following: inguinal, lumbar, incisional (ventral),
epigastric, umbilical, spigelian, diaphragmatic (hiatal).
Hernia repairs using an abdominal approach are located in the
Abdomen, Peritoneum, and Omentum subsection, Repair subheading
(49491-49611). Laparoscopic hernia repairs are in the Laparoscopy
subheading (49650-49659).
Chapter 20
Quick check 20-1
1. 
False, they may not pass spontaneously
Quick check 20-2
1. 
externally
Quick check 20-3
1. 
nephrostomy, pyelostomy
Quick check 20-4
1. 
50945
Quick check 20-5
1. 
58240
Quick check 20-6
1. 
cystoscopy, urethroscopy
Quick check 20-7
1. 
Integumentary
Quick check 20-8
1. 
28
Quick check 20-9
1. 
non-inflatable, inflatable
Quick check 20-10
1. 
orchiopexy
Quick check 20-11
1. 
54700
Quick check 20-12
1. 
abdomen, perineum
Quick check 20-13
1. 
VLAP, ILCP
Quick check 20-14
1. 
b
2. 
c
3. 
a
Quick check 20-15
1. 
needle, punch
Chapter 21
Quick check 21-1
1. 
2
Quick check 21-2
1. 
The weight of the uterus
2. 
b. approach, number, weight
Quick check 21-3
1. 
Codes 
58951, 58953, 58954, 58956
Chapter 22
Quick check 22-1
1. 
anterior, posterior
Quick check 22-2
1. 
64400-64530
2. 
64600-64681
Chapter 23
Quick check 23-1
1. 
b
2. 
c
3. 
a
Quick check 23-2
1. 
b
2. 
c
3. 
d
4. 
a
Quick check 23-3
1. 
False
Chapter 24
Quick check 24-1
1. 
76810
Quick check 24-2
1. 
False
Chapter 25
Quick check 25-1
1. 
-59
Quick check 25-2
1. 
report separate entries
Quick check 25-3
1. 
88150-88154
Chapter 26
Quick check 26-1
1. 
b
Quick check 26-2
1. 
absence of the lens of the eye
Quick check 26-3
1. 
d. EEG, EOG, EMG
APPENDIX D. Toolbox answers
Note: The following reference manuals were used in preparing these
answers: 
2017 ICD-10-CM, 2017 ICD-10-PCS, 2017 HCPCS Level II,
and 
Current Procedural Terminology, 2017.
Current Procedural Terminology
 (CPT) is copyright 2016 American
Medical Association. All Rights Reserved. No fee schedules, basic
units, relative values, or related listings are included in CPT. The
AMA assumes no liability for the data contained herein. Applicable
FARS/DFARS restrictions apply to government use.
Note: For clarity we’ve used different colors to identify the codes
used in each answer. CPT codes are in blue, ICD-10-CM codes are in
red, HCPCS codes are in green, ICD-10-PCS codes are in black.
Chapter 1
Toolbox 1-1
c. 
Never submit a claim for any patient, at any time, for any reason
without appropriate documentation in the medical record that
supports the claim.
Chapter 3
Toolbox 3-1
1. 
Z01.811
2. 
lung mass
3. 
Z code
Chapter 4
Toolbox 4-1
M70.941
 and 
M70.942
Chapter 5
Toolbox 5-1
1. 
complication
2. 
R65.2
3. 
organ dysfunction
Chapter 7
Toolbox 7-1
1. 
O35.4
2. 
XX
3. 
0
4. 
O35.4XX0
Chapter 10
Toolbox 10-1
1. 
11401, 99383, 90707, 90460, 90700, 90461
 (most expensive to least
expensive)
2. 
Yes, 
99383-25
; -51 is not added to any of these codes
Chapter 11
Toolbox 11-1
Six (Location, Quality, Severity, Duration, Timing, Context)
Chapter 12
Toolbox 12-1
1. 
-QY
2. 
00756
3. 
P3
Chapter 14
Toolbox 14-1
1. 
d
2. 
Because the code reports one or many toenail(s)
Chapter 15
Toolbox 15-1
W14.XXXA
 (Fall, from, tree, initial encounter), 
Y92.017
 (Accident,
house), 
Y93.H2
 (Injury while landscaping)
Chapter 16
Toolbox 16-1
1. 
planned
2. 
vertical
Chapter 17
Toolbox 17-1
1. 
planned
2. 
vertical
Chapter 19
Toolbox 19-1
1. 
dysphagia
2. 
Retrograde
3. 
yes
Chapter 20
Toolbox 20-1
1. 
Renal pelvis
2. 
See Urography, Intravenous; Urography, Retrograde
Chapter 21
Toolbox 21-1
1. 
no
2. 
no
3. 
no
Chapter 22
Toolbox 22-1
1. 
See
 Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunt
2. 
62180-62192, 62200-62223
3. 
62201
Chapter 23
Toolbox 23-1
1. 
tympanostomy
2. 
heal or close up
3. 
air
Chapter 24
Toolbox 24-1
1. 
No
2. 
Because the radiologist provided the professional and the technical
portions of the service
3. 
written report
Chapter 25
Toolbox 25-1
1. 
80307
, Chromatography, drug screen, any number of drug classes,
presumptive, single or multiple drug class method chemical
analyzers.
2. 
80306
, Drug Assay, Barbiturates, Tricyclic Antidepressants, single
drug class method by instrumented test systems.
Chapter 26
Toolbox 26-1
1. 
96360
APPENDIX E. Learning objective review
answers
Note: The following reference manuals were used in preparing these
answers: 
2017 ICD-10-CM, 2017 ICD-10-PCS, 2017 HCPCS Level II,
and 
Current Procedural Terminology, 2017.
Current Procedural Terminology
 (CPT) is copyright 2016 American
Medical Association. All Rights Reserved. No fee schedules, basic
units, relative values, or related listings are included in CPT. The
AMA assumes no liability for the data contained herein. Applicable
FARS/DFARS restrictions apply to government use.
Note: For clarity we’ve used different colors to identify the codes
used in each answer. CPT codes are in blue, ICD-10-CM codes are in
red, HCPCS codes are in green, ICD-10-PCS codes are in black.
Chapter 1
Learning objective review
1. 
A: Hospital, B: Physician, D: Prescription drugs
2. 
protected health information
3. 
October
4. 
Physician work, practice expense and malpractice
5. 
Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
6. 
cost-effective, improve
Chapter 2
Learning objective review
1. 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
2. 
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS)
3. 
Greater specificity
4. 
Excludes1
5. 
Hospitals
Chapter 3
Learning objective review
1. 
Principal
2. 
Signs or symptoms
3. 
Reason for surgery
4. 
Data integrity
5. 
Outpatient
6. 
Z03
 and 
Z04
7. 
Coexisting
8. 
Inpatient
9. 
Chronic
10. 
Z01.89
, Encounter for other specified special examinations
11. 
Z codes
12. 
Condition that describes the reason for the surgery
13. 
Z34
14. 
Postoperative diagnosis
Chapter 4
Learning objective review
1. 
additional characters
2. 
Tabular
3. 
Outpatient
4. 
Tabular
5. 
Seven
6. 
integral
7. 
underlying condition
8. 
Acute
9. 
Combination
10. 
Late Effects
11. 
Alphabetic Index
12. 
Once
13. 
Paired
Chapter 5
Learning objective review
1. 
Infection
2. 
Malignancy
3. 
Chronic and Acute
4. 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
5. 
Combination code
6. 
Acute form
7. 
Upper, lower or unspecified eyelid
8. 
Underlying disease
9. 
Reason for the Encounter
10. 
Manifestation
11. 
Sinusitis
Chapter 6
Learning objective review
1. 
Tabular
2. 
depth of the ulcer
3. 
Bone
Chapter 7
Learning objective review
1. 
Complication
2. 
28 days
3. 
Personal history of the malformation
4. 
Symptom reported by the patient
5. 
A
Chapter 8
Learning objective review
1. 
CPT/HCPCS
2. 
AMA
3. 
HIPAA
4. 
24D
5. 
Triangle
6. 
Appendix A
7. 
Six
8. 
Each section
9. 
stand-alone
10. 
Appendix C
11. 
Unlisted procedure
12. 
special report
13. 
Category III Codes
14. 
tabular
Chapter 9
Learning objective review
1. 
Five
2. 
Q codes
3. 
T codes
4. 
After the Table of Drugs section or preceding the A codes
5. 
Generic
6. 
A4550
Chapter 10
Learning objective review
1. 
Appendix A
2. 
Modifier
3. 
-22
4. 
-23
5. 
-24
6. 
Second E&M
7. 
-26
8. 
-32
9. 
US Preventative Services Task Force (USPSTF)
10. 
Anesthesia codes
11. 
One unit
12. 
Primary Procedure
13. 
-52
14. 
Time
15. 
-54
16. 
Discharge from the hospital
17. 
Preoperative
18. 
Global Days
19. 
-58
20. 
E/M codes and weekly radiation management
21. 
Distinct, separate service
22. 
4 kg or 8.8 lbs
23. 
More than two
24. 
-76
25. 
-77
26. 
operating/designated procedure room
27. 
Fraudulent
28. 
-80
29. 
-81
30. 
Teaching facility
31. 
outside laboratory
32. 
No
33. 
-92
34. 
Four
Chapter 11
Learning objective review
1. 
Place of Service
2. 
Established
3. 
Inpatient
4. 
Contributory
5. 
Medical decision making
6. 
History
7. 
Objective
8. 
Medical decision making
9. 
Coordination of care
10. 
99211
11. 
Other
12. 
Documentation guidelines
13. 
problem focused
Chapter 12
Learning objective review
1. 
Moderate (conscious)
2. 
anatomic
3. 
Base, time and modifying factors
4. 
condition
5. 
-QK
Chapter 13
Learning objective review
1. 
medical specialty
2. 
subcategories
3. 
No specific CPT for that procedure
4. 
definition or description
5. 
assigned
6. 
Anesthesiologist
7. 
If imaging guidance was used during the aspiration
Chapter 14
Learning objective review
1. 
No
2. 
the condition
3. 
-51 multiple procedures
4. 
Complex
5. 
Excisional
6. 
Radical
Chapter 15
Learning objective review
1. 
Reason for treatment
2. 
Skeletal traction
3. 
intermediate joint
4. 
Application service
5. 
-51
6. 
Medial, lateral, patellofemoral
Chapter 16
Learning objective review
1. 
Anatomic site
2. 
Diagnostic nasal endoscopes
3. 
Respiratory System Subsection
4. 
Sinusotomy
5. 
Two stages
6. 
Cricothyroid
7. 
Pneumonocentesis
8. 
How much of the lung is removed
Chapter 17
Learning objective review
1. 
Medicine
2. 
Thrombolysis
3. 
Interventional
4. 
Diagnostic/Therapeutic
5. 
Supervision
6. 
MRI
Chapter 18
Learning objective review
1. 
Spleen, General and Lymph Nodes and Lymph Channels
2. 
Lymphatic
3. 
Five
4. 
Mediastinum
5. 
Surgical approach
6. 
Biopsy
Chapter 19
Learning objective review
1. 
Anatomic site and procedure
2. 
Vermilionectomy
3. 
Buccal cavity
4. 
Lingual frenum
5. 
American Dental Association
6. 
Palate
7. 
Parotid, submandibular, and sublingual
8. 
Congenital
9. 
Approach
10. 
Weight loss
11. 
Colostomy
12. 
Meckel’s diverticulum
13. 
Open, Percutaneous, Laparoscopic
14. 
Proctosigmoidoscopy
15. 
Anus
16. 
Liver transplant
17. 
Choledochotomy
18. 
Pancreas
19. 
Reducible
Chapter 20
Learning objective review
1. 
Nephrotomy
2. 
Kidney, ureter, bladder and urethra
3. 
Cutting away (or erosion) of tissue
4. 
Anatomic
5. 
Simple or extensive
6. 
Removal of a testis
Chapter 21
Learning objective review
1. 
Brachytherapy
2. 
Prostate
3. 
Two
4. 
Incision, excision, destruction
5. 
No, the hysterectomy code includes removal of ovaries
6. 
Antepartum
7. 
14
8. 
Abortion codes
9. 
vaginal birth after cesarean
Chapter 22
Learning objective review
1. 
Four (Thyroid, Parathyroid, Thymus, Adrenal)
2. 
Ductless
3. 
Thyroidectomy
4. 
12
5. 
Cerebrum
6. 
Condition and approach
Chapter 23
Learning objective review
1. 
Preventive treatment
2. 
Slit lamp
3. 
Cataract extraction. Extacapsular cataract extraction and
Intracapsular cataract extraction
4. 
Otoplasty
5. 
Eustachian tube
6. 
Labyrinthectomy
7. 
Add-on code to primary procedure
8. 
Microsurgical procedures
Chapter 24
Learning objective review
1. 
Making of a film
2. 
Component coding
3. 
-26
4. 
Visualization of size and condition
5. 
Diagnostic radiology (Diagnostic imaging)
6. 
-52
Chapter 25
Learning objective review
1. 
Type
2. 
False
3. 
Quantitative tests
4. 
Each test listed must be performed
5. 
Drug assay
6. 
Qualitative tests
7. 
Evocative/Suppression testing
8. 
Limited
9. 
Nonspecific
10. 
Blood count
11. 
Antibodies
12. 
The reinfusion of blood or blood components to the same
individual from whom they were taken
13. 
Petri
14. 
Extent of the examination
15. 
Cytopathology subsection codes
16. 
Six levels
17. 
Other Procedures
18. 
Level V
Chapter 26
Learning objective review
1
.
 
99070
2. 
Time based
3. 
Biofeedback
4. 
Peritoneal
5. 
Motility
6. 
Intermediate and comprehensive
7. 
Left heart catheterization
8. 
Spirometry
9. 
Immunotherapy
10. 
Endocrine
11. 
Polysomnography
12. 
Aphasia
13. 
Push
14. 
Evaluation and management
15. 
Type of testing and time
16. 
Nonphysician
17. 
Body regions
18. 
Non-face-to-face
19. 
Adjunct
20. 
Pharmacist
Chapter 27
Learning objective review
1. 
Physician services
2. 
Principal diagnosis
3. 
Inpatient hospital
4. 
Outpatient setting
5. 
The symptom code
6. 
conditions that develop during a particular hospital stay
7. 
34
APPENDIX F. EHR screens
FIGURE F–1
Sample EHR Screen, Patient Information
FIGURE F–2
Sample EHR Screen, Provider Information
 
FIGURE F–3
Sample EHR Screen, Payer Information
FIGURE F–4
Sample EHR Screen, Encounter Notes
FIGURE F–5
Sample EHR Screen, Claim Information
FIGURE F–6
Sample EHR Screen, Charge Capture
FIGURE F–7
Sample EHR Screen, Administration Information
FIGURE F–8
Sample EHR Screen, Emergency Contact
Glossary
A-mode: 
 
one-dimensional ultrasonic display reflecting the time it
takes a sound wave to reach a structure and reflect back; maps the
structure’s outline
ablation: 
 
removal by cutting or destruction
abortion: 
 
termination of pregnancy
abscess: 
 
localized collection of pus that will result in the
disintegration of tissue over time
abuse: 
 
misuse of substance
acquired: 
 
not genetic
actinotherapy: 
 
treatment of acne using ultraviolet rays
acute: 
 
of sudden onset and short duration
addiction: 
 
dependence on a drug
admission: 
 
attention to an acute illness or injury resulting in
admission to a hospital
adrenal: 
 
glands, located at the top of the kidneys, that produce
steroid hormones
AHA: 
 
American Hospital Association
AHIMA: 
 
American Health Information Management Association
allogenic: 
 
a graft that is from the same species, but genetically
different
allograft: 
 
tissue graft between individuals who are not of the same
genotype
allotransplantation: 
 
transplantation between individuals who are not
of the same genotype
amniocentesis: 
 
percutaneous aspiration of amniotic fluid
anastomosis: 
 
surgical connection of two tubular structures, such as
two pieces of the intestine
aneurysm: 
 
is an abnormal weakening of a vessel wall with
outpouching beyond the normal confines of the vessel
angiography: 
 
taking of x-ray films of vessels after injection of
contrast material
angioplasty: 
 
surgical or percutaneous procedure in a vessel to dilate
the vessel opening; used in the treatment of atherosclerotic disease
angioscopy: 
 
studying the capillaries of the eyes
anomaloscope: 
 
instrument used to test color vision
anomaly: 
 
abnormality
anoscopy: 
 
procedure that uses a scope to examine the anus
antepartum: 
 
before childbirth
anterior (ventral): 
 
in front of
anterior segment: 
 
those parts of the eye in the front of and including
the lens, orbit, extraocular muscles, and eyelid
anterior synechiae: 
 
adhesions of the iris to the cornea
anteroposterior: 
 
from front to back
antrum: 
 
sinus
aortography: 
 
radiographic recording of the aorta
apexcardiography: 
 
noninvasive graphic recording of the movement
of the chest wall from the cardiac pulsations from the region of the
apex of the heart, usually of the left ventricle
APC (Ambulatory Payment Classification): 
 
a patient classification
that provides a payment system for outpatients
aphakia: 
 
absence of the lens of the eye
apicectomy: 
 
excision of a portion of the temporal bone
Appendix A: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; lists all
modifiers with complete explanations for use
Appendix B: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains a
complete list of additions to, deletions from, and revisions of the
previous edition
Appendix C: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; presents
clinical examples of Evaluation and Management (E/M)
Appendix D: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains a list
of the CPT add-on codes
Appendix E: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains a list
of modifier -51 exempt codes
Appendix F: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains
information about modifier -63, Procedures Performed on Infants
less than 4-kg
Appendix G: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; used to
contain CPT codes that include moderate (conscious) sedation
(deleted for 2017)
Appendix H: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains
website to access information about performance measures of
Category II codes
Appendix I: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains
information about Genetic Testing Code Modifiers (deleted for
2013)
Appendix J: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains
information on sensory, motor, and mixed nerves and the
corresponding conduction study codes
Appendix K: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains the
codes that are pending FDA (Food and Drug Administration)
approval
Appendix L: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains the
vascular families
Appendix M: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains
deleted CPT codes
Appendix N: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains a
summary of resequenced CPT codes
Appendix O: 
 
located near the back of the CPT manual; contains
Multianalyte Assays with Algorithmic Analyses codes
arteriovenous fistula: 
 
direct communication (passage) between an
artery and vein
artery: 
 
vessel that generally carries oxygenated blood from the heart
to body tissues (pulmonary artery carries un-oxygenated blood)
arthrodesis: 
 
surgical immobilization of a joint
arthrography: 
 
radiographic recording of a joint
arthroplasty: 
 
reshaping or reconstruction of a joint
aspiration: 
 
use of a needle and a syringe to withdraw fluid
assignment: 
 
Medicare’s payment for the service, which participating
physicians agree to accept as payment in full
astigmatism: 
 
condition in which the refractive surfaces of the eye are
unequal
asymptomatic: 
 
not showing any of the typical symptoms of a disease
or condition
atrium: 
 
chamber in the upper part of the heart
attending physician: 
 
the physician with the primary responsibility
for care of the patient
audi-: 
 
prefix meaning hearing
audiometry: 
 
hearing testing
aur-: 
 
prefix meaning ear
aural atresia: 
 
congenital absence of the external auditory canal
autogenous, autologous: 
 
from oneself
axillary nodes: 
 
lymph nodes located in the armpit
B-scan: 
 
two-dimensional display of tissues and organs
backbench work: 
 
special preparation of an organ before organ
transplantation
bariatric surgery: 
 
gastric restrictive procedures that are used to treat
morbid obesity and are accomplished by placing a restrictive
device around the stomach to decrease its functional size
barium enema: 
 
radiographic contrast medium–enhanced
examination of the colon
benign: 
 
not progressive
benign hypertension: 
 
hypertensive condition with a continuous,
mild blood pressure elevation
bifocal: 
 
two focuses in eyeglasses, one usually for close work and the
other for improvement of distance vision
bilateral: 
 
occurring on two sides
bilobectomy: 
 
surgical removal of two lobes of a lung
biofeedback: 
 
process of giving a person self-information
biometry: 
 
application of a statistical measure to a biologic fact
biopsy: 
 
removal of a small piece of living tissue for diagnostic
purposes
blephar(o)-: 
 
prefix meaning eyelid
block: 
 
frozen piece of a sample
blood patch: 
 
a procedure in which a cerebrospinal fluid leak is closed
by means of an injection of the patient’s blood into the area used
during spinal anesthesia
brachytherapy: 
 
therapy using radioactive sources that are placed
inside the body
bronchography: 
 
radiographic recording of the lungs
bronchoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the bronchi
bronchoscopy: 
 
inspection of the bronchial tree using a bronchoscope
bulbocavernosus: 
 
muscle that constricts the vagina in a female and
the urethra in a male
bulbourethral gland: 
 
rounded mass of the urethra
bypass: 
 
to go around
calculus: 
 
concretion of mineral salts, also called a stone
calycoplasty: 
 
surgical reconstruction of a recess of the renal pelvis
calyx: 
 
recess of the renal pelvis
cannulation: 
 
insertion of a tube into a duct or cavity
carcinoma in situ: 
 
a cancerous tumor in its original place that has not
invaded neighboring tissues
cardiopulmonary: 
 
refers to the heart and lungs
cardiopulmonary bypass: 
 
blood bypasses the heart through a heart-
lung machine during open-heart surgery
cardioversion: 
 
electric shock to the heart to restore normal rhythm
cataract: 
 
opaque covering on or in the lens
Category I: 
 
CPT codes approved by the FDA and representing
widely used services and procedures
Category II: 
 
Supplemental codes that can be used for performance
measurements
Category III: 
 
Temporary CPT codes
catheter: 
 
tube placed into the body to put fluid in or take fluid out
caudal: 
 
away from the head, or the lower part of the body; same as
inferior
cauterization: 
 
destruction of tissue by the use of cautery
cavernosa–corpus spongiosum shunt: 
 
creation of a connection
between a cavity of the penis and the urethra
cavernosa–glans penis fistulization: 
 
creation of a connection
between a cavity of the penis and the glans penis, which overlaps
the penis cavity
cavernosa–saphenous vein shunt: 
 
creation of a connection between
the cavity of the penis and a vein
cavernosography: 
 
radiographic recording of a cavity, e.g., the
pulmonary cavity or the main part of the penis
cavernosometry: 
 
measurement of the pressure in a cavity, e.g., the
penis
-centesis: 
 
suffix meaning puncture of a cavity
central nervous system (CNS): 
 
brain and spinal cord
cervical: 
 
pertaining to the neck or to the cervix of the uterus
cervix uteri: 
 
rounded, cone-shaped neck of the uterus
cesarean: 
 
surgical opening through abdominal wall for delivery
CF (conversion factor): 
 
national dollar amount that is applied to all
services paid on the Medicare Fee Schedule basis
cholangiography: 
 
radiographic recording of the bile ducts
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP): 
 
radiographic recording of the
biliary system and pancreas
chole-: 
 
prefix meaning bile
cholecystectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the gallbladder
cholecystoenterostomy: 
 
creation of a connection between the
gallbladder and intestine
cholecystography: 
 
radiographic recording of the gallbladder
chordee: 
 
condition resulting in the penis’ being bent downward
chorionic villus sampling (CVS): 
 
biopsy of the outermost part of the
placenta
chromotubation: 
 
surgical procedure to open obstructed fallopian
tubes
chronic: 
 
of long duration
Clinical Documentation Improvement (CDI): 
 
programs used by
medical providers to improve documentation keyed to the quality
of coding, medical necessity, and denial standards
Cloquet’s node: 
 
also called a gland; it is the highest of the deep groin
lymph nodes
closed treatment: 
 
fracture site that is not surgically opened and
visualized
CMS: 
 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, formerly HCFA,
Health Care Financing Administration
colonoscopy: 
 
fiberscopic examination of the entire colon that may
include part of the terminal ileum
colostomy: 
 
artificial opening between the colon and the abdominal
wall
combination code: 
 
single ICD-10-CM/ICD-9-CM code used to
classify two diagnoses
combination coding: 
 
a code from the Radiology section as well as a
code from one of the other sections must be used to fully describe
the procedure
communicable disease: 
 
disease that can be transmitted from one
person to another or one species to another
comparative conditions: 
 
patient conditions that are documented as
“either/or” in the medical record
component: 
 
part
component coding: 
 
a code from the Radiology section as well as a
code from one of the other sections must be used to fully describe
the procedure
computed axial tomography (CAT or CT): 
 
procedure by which
selected planes of tissue are pinpointed through computer
enhancement, and images may be reconstructed by analysis of
variance in absorption of the tissue
concurrent care: 
 
the provision of similar services (e.g., hospital visits)
to the same patient by more than one physician on the same day.
Each physician provides services for a separate condition, not
reasonably expected to be managed by the attending physician.
When concurrent care is provided, the diagnosis must reflect the
medical necessity of different specialties
congenital: 
 
existing from birth
conjunctiva: 
 
the lining of the eyelids and the covering of the sclerae
conscious sedation: 
 
a decreased level of consciousness in which the
patient is not completely asleep
constitutional examination element: 
 
assessment of the patient’s
general condition and the recording of the vital signs
consultation: 
 
includes those services rendered by a physician whose
opinion or advice is requested by another physician or agency
concerning the evaluation and/or treatment of a patient; a
consultant is not an attending physician
contralateral: 
 
the opposite side
contributory factors: 
 
counseling, coordination of care, nature of the
presenting problem, and time of an E/M service
cordectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the vocal cord(s)
cordocentesis: 
 
procedure to obtain a fetal blood sample; also called a
percutaneous umbilical blood sampling
corneosclera: 
 
cornea and sclera of the eye
corpora cavernosa: 
 
the two cavities of the penis
corpus uteri: 
 
uterus
counseling: 
 
a discussion with a patient and/or family concerning one
or more of the following areas: diagnostic results, impressions,
and/or recommended diagnostic studies; prognosis; risks and
benefits of treatment; instructions for treatment; importance of
compliance with treatment; risk factor reduction; and patient and
family education
CPT (Current Procedural Terminology): 
 
a coding system developed
by the American Medical Association (AMA) to convert widely
accepted, uniform descriptions of medical, surgical, and diagnostic
services rendered by health care providers into five-digit codes
cranium: 
 
that part of the skeleton that encloses the brain
critical care: 
 
the care of critically ill patients in medical emergencies
that requires the constant attendance of the physician (e.g., cardiac
arrest, shock, bleeding, respiratory failure); critical care is usually,
but not always, given in a critical care area, such as the coronary
care unit (CCU) or the intensive care unit (ICU)
CRNA: 
 
certified registered nurse anesthetist
Crohn’s disease: 
 
regional enteritis
cryosurgery: 
 
destruction of lesions using extreme cold
curettage: 
 
scraping of a cavity using a spoon-shaped instrument
cycl/o-: 
 
prefix meaning ciliary body or eye muscle
cyst: 
 
closed sac containing matter or fluid
cystic hygroma: 
 
congenital deformity or benign tumor of the
lymphatic system
cystocele: 
 
herniation of the bladder into the vagina
cystography: 
 
radiographic recording of the urinary bladder
cystolithectomy: 
 
removal of a calculus (stone) from the urinary
bladder
cystolithotomy: 
 
cystolithectomy
cystometrogram (CMG): 
 
measurement of the pressures and capacity
of the urinary bladder
cystoplasty: 
 
surgical reconstruction of the bladder
cystorrhaphy: 
 
suture of the bladder
cystoscopy: 
 
use of a scope to view the bladder
cystostomy: 
 
surgical creation of an opening into the bladder
cystotomy: 
 
incision into the bladder
cystourethroplasty: 
 
surgical reconstruction of the bladder and
urethra
cystourethroscopy: 
 
use of a scope to view the bladder and urethra
cytopathology: 
 
study of the diseases of cells
dacry/o-: 
 
prefix meaning tear or tear duct
dacryocyst/o-: 
 
prefix meaning pertaining to the lacrimal sac
dacryocystography: 
 
radiographic recording of the lacrimal sac or tear
duct sac
debridement: 
 
cleansing of or removal of dead tissue from a wound
delivery: 
 
childbirth
Demerol: 
 
a narcotic analgesic
dermatoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the skin
dermis: 
 
second layer of skin, holding blood vessels, nerve endings,
sweat glands, and hair follicles
destruction: 
 
killing of tissue by means of electrocautery, laser,
chemicals, or other means
DHHS: 
 
Department of Health and Human Services
diagnostic: 
 
that done to identify the cause, origin, or extent of a
condition
diaphragm: 
 
muscular wall that separates the thoracic and abdominal
cavities
diaphragmatic hernia: 
 
hernia of the diaphragm
dilation: 
 
expansion (of the cervix)
diskography: 
 
radiographic recording of an intervertebral joint
dislocation: 
 
placement in a location other than the original location
displacement therapy: 
 
procedure in which the physician flushes
saline solution into the sinuses to remove mucus or pus
distal: 
 
farther from the point of attachment or origin
distinct procedure: 
 
one service or procedure that has no relationship
to another service or procedure
Doppler: 
 
ultrasonic measure of blood movement
dosimetry: 
 
scientific calculation of radiation emitted from various
radioactive sources
drainage: 
 
free flow or withdrawal of fluids from a wound or cavity
DRGs (Diagnosis Related Groups): 
 
a disease classification system
that relates the type of inpatients a hospital treats (case mix) to the
costs incurred by the hospital (now MS-DRGs)
dual-chamber pacemaker: 
 
electrodes of the pacemaker are placed in
both the atria and the ventricle of the heart
duodenography: 
 
radiographic recording of the duodenum, or first
part of the small intestine
E Codes: 
 
alphanumeric designations preceded by the letter “E, ” used
to classify external causes in ICD-9-CM
ear, parts of the external: 
 
auricle, pinna, external acoustic, meatus,
and tympanic membrane
ear, parts of the inner: 
 
vestibule, semicircular canals, and cochlea
ear, parts of the middle: 
 
malleus, incus, and stapes
ECG: 
 
see electrocardiogram
echocardiography: 
 
radiographic recording of the heart or heart walls
or surrounding tissues
echoencephalography: 
 
ultrasound of the brain
echography: 
 
ultrasound procedure in which sound waves are
bounced off an internal organ and the resulting image is recorded
-ectomy: 
 
suffix meaning removal of part or all of an organ of the
body
ectopic: 
 
pregnancy outside the uterus (i.e., in the fallopian tube)
EEG: 
 
see electroencephalogram
electrocardiogram (ECG): 
 
written record of the electrical activity of
the heart
electrocochleography: 
 
stimulation of the cochlea to measure
electrical activity
electrode: 
 
lead attached to a generator that carries the electric current
from the generator to the atria or ventricles
electrodesiccation: 
 
destruction of a lesion by the use of electric
current radiated through a needle
electroencephalogram (EEG) (EKG): 
 
written record of the electrical
activity of the brain
electrohydraulic fragmentation: 
 
use of a probe containing two
electrodes that are applied, one on each side, of the calculus
electromyogram (EMG): 
 
written record of the electrical activity of
the skeletal muscles
electromyography (EMG): 
 
recording of the electrical impulses of
muscles
electro-oculogram (EOG): 
 
written record of the electrical activity of
the eye
electrophysiology: 
 
the study of the electrical system of the heart,
including the study of arrhythmias
embolectomy: 
 
removal of blockage (embolism) from vessels
embolism: 
 
blockage of a blood vessel by a blood clot or other matter
that has moved from another area of the body through the
circulatory system
emergency care services: 
 
services that are provided by the physician
in the emergency department for unplanned patient encounters; no
distinction is made between new and established patients who are
seen in the emergency department
encephalography: 
 
radiographic recording of the subarachnoid space
and ventricles of the brain
endarterectomy: 
 
incision into an artery to remove the inner lining so
as to eliminate disease or blockage
endoluminal imaging: 
 
a test that uses sound waves to examine
coronary vessels of the heart
endomyocardial: 
 
pertaining to the inner and middle layers of the
heart
endopyelotomy: 
 
with the use of an endoscope, an incision is made to
correct stenosis of the ureteropelvic junction
endoscopy: 
 
inspection of body organs or cavities using a lighted
scope that may be inserted through an existing opening or through
a small incision
endotracheal tube: 
 
can be inserted through the nose or mouth and
passed into the trachea for ventilation
endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR): 
 
an emerging technology that
involves placing a stent graft, or a fabric tube, inside the affected
area of the blood vessel by access through an artery
enterocystoplasty: 
 
surgical reconstruction of the small intestine after
the removal of a cyst and usually including a bowel anastomosis
enucleation: 
 
removal of an organ or organs from a body cavity
epicardial: 
 
over the heart
epidermis: 
 
outer layer of skin
epididymectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the epididymis
epididymis: 
 
tube located at the top of the testes that stores sperm
epididymography: 
 
radiographic recording of the epididymis
epididymovasostomy: 
 
creation of a new connection between the vas
deferens and epididymis
epidural anesthesia: 
 
injection of an anesthesia agent into the spaces
between the vertebrae. Also known as peridural anesthesia,
epidural, epidural block, and intraspinal anesthesia
epiglottidectomy: 
 
excision of the covering of the larynx
eponym: 
 
disease, structure, or procedure that is named after a person
ESRD: 
 
end-stage renal disease
established patient: 
 
a patient who has received professional services
from the physician or another physician of the exact same specialty
and subspecialty in the same group within the past 3 years
etiology: 
 
study of causes of diseases
eventration: 
 
protrusion of the bowel through the viscera of the
abdomen
evisceration: 
 
pulling the viscera outside of the body through an
incision
exacerbation: 
 
worsening or increase of severity of a condition or
disease
excision: 
 
it is full-thickness removal of a lesion that may include
simple closure
excisional: 
 
removal of an entire lesion for biopsy
Exclusive Provider Organization (EPO): 
 
similar to a Health
Maintenance Organization except that the providers of the services
are not prepaid, but rather are paid on a fee-for-service basis
exenteration: 
 
removal of an organ all in one piece
exostosis: 
 
bony growth
exstrophy: 
 
condition in which an organ is turned inside out
exteriorization: 
 
developing an artificial opening through the
abdominal wall to take out a diseased portion of the intestine
External Cause Code: 
 
classification of health condition due to
external cause
extirpation: 
 
taking or cutting out solid matter from a body part
false aneurysm: 
 
sac of clotted blood that has completely destroyed
the vessel and is being contained by the tissue that surrounds the
vessel
fascia lata grafts: 
 
a graft of fibrous tissue that is found beneath the
skin
fasciectomy: 
 
excision of fascia
FDA (Food and Drug Administration): 
 
responsible for the safety of
food and drugs in America; is an agency within the U.S. Public
Health Service, which is part of the Department of Health and
Human Services
Federal Register: 
 
official publication of all “Presidential Documents,
” “Rules and Regulations, ” “Proposed Rules, ” and “Notices”;
government-instituted national changes are published in the
Federal Register
fenestration: 
 
creation of a new opening in the inner wall of the
middle ear
fimbrioplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the fringe of the uterine tube
first-listed diagnosis: 
 
outpatient diagnosis
Fiscal Intermediary (FI): 
 
handled administration of Medicare claims
but was phased out by 2011 into MACs
fistula: 
 
abnormal opening from one area to another area or to the
outside of the body
fluoroscopy: 
 
procedure for viewing the interior of the body using x-
rays and projecting the image onto a television screen
forensic examination: 
 
a head to toe examination performed when an
injury occurs that was not the result of natural causes; involves
legal investigation
fracture: 
 
break in a bone
fulguration: 
 
use of electric current to destroy tissue
fundoplasty: 
 
repair of the bottom of an organ or muscle
gastro-: 
 
prefix meaning stomach
gastrointestinal: 
 
pertaining to the stomach and intestine
gastroplasty: 
 
operation on the stomach for repair or reconfiguration
gastrostomy: 
 
artificial opening between the stomach and the
abdominal wall
general anesthesia: 
 
a state of unconsciousness produced by the
administration of a drug; it can be administered by inhalation or
intramuscularly, rectally, or intravenously
gloss(o)-: 
 
prefix meaning tongue
gonioscopy: 
 
use of a scope to gain a view of the iridocorneal angle, or
the anatomical angle formed between the eye’s cornea and iris
Group Practice Model: 
 
an organization of physicians who contract
with a Health Maintenance Organization to provide services to the
enrollees of the HMO
grouper: 
 
computer used to input the principal diagnosis and other
critical information about a patient and then provide the correct
MS-DRG code
Guidelines: 
 
provide specific instructions about coding for each
section of the CPT manual; the Guidelines contain definitions of
terms, applicable modifiers, explanation of notes, subsection
information, unlisted services, special reports information, and
clinical examples
HCFA: 
 
Health Care Financing Administration, now known as
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO): 
 
a health care delivery
system in which an enrollee is assigned a primary care physician
who manages all the health care needs of the enrollee
hemodialysis: 
 
cleansing of the blood outside of the body
hepat(o)-: 
 
prefix meaning liver
hepatography: 
 
radiographic recording of the liver
hernia: 
 
organ or tissue protruding through the wall or cavity that
usually contains it
histology: 
 
study of the minute structures, composition, and function
of tissues
Hodgkin disease: 
 
malignant lymphoma
hydrocele: 
 
sac of fluid
hypertension, uncontrolled: 
 
untreated hypertension or hypertension
that is not responding to the therapeutic regimen
hypertensive heart disease: 
 
secondary effects on the heart of
prolonged, sustained systemic hypertension; the heart has to work
against greatly increased resistance, causing increased blood
pressure
hypogastric: 
 
lowest middle abdominal area
hyposensitization: 
 
decreased sensitivity
hypospadias: 
 
congenital deformity of the urethra in which the
urethral opening is on the underside of the penis rather than at the
end
hypotension: 
 
abnormally low blood pressure; sometimes induced
during surgical procedures
hypothermia: 
 
low body temperature; sometimes induced during
surgical procedures
hysterectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the uterus
hysterorrhaphy: 
 
suturing of the uterus
hysterosalpingography: 
 
radiographic recording of the uterine cavity
and fallopian tubes
hysteroscopy: 
 
visualization of the canal of the uterine cervix and
cavity of the uterus using a scope placed through the vagina
hysterotomy: 
 
incision into the uterus
ileostomy: 
 
artificial opening between the ileum and the abdominal
wall
imbrication: 
 
overlapping
immunotherapy: 
 
therapy to increase immunity
implantable defibrillator: 
 
surgically placed device that directs an
electric current shock to the heart to restore rhythm
incarcerated: 
 
regarding hernias, a constricted, irreducible hernia that
may cause obstruction of an intestine
incision: 
 
surgically cutting into
incision and drainage: 
 
to cut and withdraw fluid
incisional: 
 
see incision
Individual Practice Association (IPA): 
 
an organization of physicians
who provide services for a set fee; a Health Maintenance
Organization will often contract with the IPA for services to their
enrollees
infectious disease carrier: 
 
person who has a communicable disease
but is symptom free despite having the disease
infectious disease contact: 
 
encounter with a person who has a
disease that can be communicated or transmitted
inferior: 
 
away from the head or the lower part of the body; also
known as caudal
inguinofemoral: 
 
referring to the groin and thigh
injection: 
 
introduction of fluid into a tissue, vessel, or cavity
inpatient: 
 
one who has been formally admitted to a health care
facility
in situ: 
 
malignancy that is within the original site of development
and has not invaded neighboring tissue
internal/external fixation: 
 
application of pins, wires, screws, and so
on to immobilize a body part; they can be placed externally or
internally
intracardiac: 
 
inside the heart
intramural: 
 
within the organ wall
intramuscular: 
 
into a muscle
intraoperative: 
 
period of time during which a surgical procedure is
being performed
intravenous: 
 
into a vein
intravenous pyelography (IVP): 
 
radiographic recording of the
urinary system
introitus: 
 
opening or entrance to the vagina
intubation: 
 
insertion of a tube
invasive: 
 
entering the body, breaking the skin
iontophoresis: 
 
introduction of ions into the body
ischemia: 
 
deficient blood supply due to obstruction of the circulatory
system
isthmus: 
 
connection of two regions or structures
isthmus, thyroid: 
 
tissue connection between right and left thyroid
lobes
isthmusectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the isthmus
italicized code: 
 
an ICD-10-CM code that can never be sequenced as
the principal or primary diagnosis
jejunostomy: 
 
artificial opening between the jejunum and the
abdominal wall
joint movement: 
abduction: 
 
movement of a limb away from the midline of the body
adduction: 
 
movement of a limb toward the midline of the body
circumduction: 
 
circular movement of a limb
extension: 
 
movement by which two parts are drawn away from each
other
flexion: 
 
movement by which two parts are drawn toward each other
hyperextension: 
 
excessive extension of a limb
pronation: 
 
applied to the hand, the act of turning the palm down
supination: 
 
applied to the hand, the act of turning the palm up
jugular nodes: 
 
lymph nodes located next to the large vein in the neck
kerat/o-: 
 
prefix meaning cornea
keratoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the cornea
key components: 
 
the history, examination, and medical decision-
making complexity of an E/M service
Kock pouch: 
 
surgical creation of a urinary bladder from a segment of
the ileum
kyphosis: 
 
humpback, the abnormal curvature of the spine
labyrinth: 
 
inner connecting cavities, such as the internal ear
laminectomy: 
 
surgical excision of the lamina
laparoscopy: 
 
exploration of the abdomen and pelvic cavities using a
scope placed through a small incision in the abdominal wall
laryngeal web: 
 
congenital abnormality of connective tissue between
the vocal cords
laryngectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the larynx
laryngo-: 
 
prefix meaning larynx
laryngography: 
 
radiographic recording of the larynx
laryngoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the larynx
laryngoscope: 
 
an endoscope used to view the inside of the larynx
laryngoscopy: 
 
viewing of the larynx using a fiberoptic scope
laryngotomy: 
 
incision into the larynx
late effect: 
 
residual effect (that a condition produced) after the acute
phase of an illness or injury has terminated
lateral: 
 
away from the midline of the body (to the side)
lavage: 
 
washing out of an organ
lesion: 
 
abnormal or altered tissue, e.g., wound, cyst, abscess, or boil
ligament: 
 
a band of fibrous tissue that connects cartilage or bone and
supports a joint
ligation: 
 
binding or tying off, as in constricting the bloodflow of a
vessel or binding fallopian tubes for sterilization
litholapaxy: 
 
lithotripsy
lithotomy: 
 
incision into an organ or a duct for the purpose of
removing a stone
lithotripsy: 
 
crushing of a gallbladder or urinary bladder stone
followed by irrigation to wash the fragment out
lobectomy: 
 
surgical excision of a lobe of the lung
lymph node: 
 
station along the lymphatic system
lymphadenectomy: 
 
excision of a lymph node or nodes
lymphadenitis: 
 
inflammation of a lymph node
lymphangiography: 
 
radiographic recording of the lymphatic vessels
and nodes
lymphangiotomy: 
 
incision into a lymphatic vessel
lysis: 
 
releasing
M-mode: 
 
one-dimensional display of movement of structures
MAAC (Maximum Actual Allowable Charge): 
 
limitation on the total
amount that can be charged by physicians who are not participants
in Medicare
MAC (Medicare Administrative Contractor): 
 
an entity that manages
the process claims for CMS
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): 
 
procedure that uses nonionizing
radiation to view the body in a cross-sectional view
malignancy: 
 
used in reference to a cancerous tumor
malignant: 
 
used to describe a cancerous tumor that grows worse
over time
malignant hypertension: 
 
accelerated, severe form of hypertension,
manifested by headaches, blurred vision, dyspnea, and uremia;
usually causes permanent organ damage
mammography: 
 
radiographic recording of the breasts
Managed Care Organization (MCO): 
 
a group that is responsible for
the health care services offered to an enrolled group of persons
mandated service: 
 
a service required by an agency or organization to
be performed for a patient; usually the agency or organization pays
all or a portion of the patient’s medical bills
manifestation: 
 
sign of a disease
manipulation or reduction: 
 
words used interchangeably to mean the
attempted restoration of a fracture or joint dislocation to its normal
anatomic position
marsupialization: 
 
surgical procedure that creates an exterior pouch
from an internal abscess
mast-: 
 
prefix meaning breast
mastoid-: 
 
prefix meaning posterior temporal bone
MDC (Major Diagnostic Categories): 
 
the division of all principal
diagnoses into 25 mutually exclusive principal diagnosis areas
within the MS-DRG system
meatotomy: 
 
surgical enlargement of the opening of the urinary
meatus
medial: 
 
toward the midline of the body
mediastinoscopy: 
 
use of an endoscope inserted through a small
incision to view the mediastinum
mediastinotomy: 
 
cutting into the mediastinum
mediastinum: 
 
area between the lungs that contains the heart, aorta,
trachea, lymph nodes, thymus gland, esophagus, and bronchial
tubes
Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC): 
 
handles the
administration of Medicare claims
Medicare Risk HMO: 
 
a Medicare-funded alternative to the standard
Medicare supplemental coverage
MEI (Medicare Economic Index): 
 
government-mandated index that
ties increases in the Medicare prevailing charges to economic
indicators
MeV: 
 
megaelectron volt
MFS (Medicare Fee Schedule): 
 
schedules that list the allowable
charges for Medicare services
modality: 
 
treatment method
moderate (conscious) sedation: 
 
a decreased level of consciousness in
which the patient is not completely asleep
modifiers: 
 
added to codes to supply more specific information about
the services provided
monofocal: 
 
eyeglasses with one vision correction
morbidity: 
 
condition of being diseased or morbid
morphine: 
 
a narcotic analgesic
morphology: 
 
the science of the form and structure of organisms
mortality: 
 
death
MS-DRG (Medicare Severity Diagnosis Related Groups): 
 
a system
of classifying patient groups by related diagnoses
MSLT: 
 
multiple sleep latency testing
multiple coding: 
 
use of more than one ICD-10-CM/ICD-9-CM code
to identify both etiology and manifestation of a disease, to fully
describe condition
muscle: 
 
fibrous structures that can contract and facilitate movement
of the body. There are three types of muscles: smooth, skeletal, and
cardiac.
MVPS (Medical Volume Performance Standards): 
 
government’s
estimate of how much growth is appropriate for nationwide
physician expenditures paid by the Part B Medicare program
myasthenia gravis: 
 
syndrome characterized by muscle weakness
myelography: 
 
radiographic recording of the subarachnoid space of
the spine
myocardial infarction (MI): 
 
necrosis of the myocardium resulting
from interrupted blood supply
myring-: 
 
prefix meaning eardrum
nasal button: 
 
a synthetic circular disk used to cover a hole in the
nasal septum
nasopharyngoscopy: 
 
use of a scope to visualize the nose and
pharynx
NCPAP: 
 
nasal continuous positive airway pressure
NEC: 
 
not elsewhere classifiable
neoplasm: 
 
new tumor growth that can be benign or malignant
nephrectomy, paraperitoneal: 
 
surgical removal of a kidney by a cut
through the side along the twelfth rib
nephro-: 
 
prefix meaning kidney
nephrocutaneous fistula: 
 
a channel from the kidney to the skin
nephrolithotomy: 
 
removal of a kidney stone through an incision
made into the kidney
nephrorrhaphy: 
 
suturing of the kidney
nephrostolithotomy: 
 
procedure to establish an artificial channel
between the skin and the kidney to remove kidney stone
nephrostomy: 
 
creation of a channel into the renal pelvis of the kidney
nephrostomy, percutaneous: 
 
creation of a channel from the skin to
the renal pelvis
nephrotomy: 
 
incision into the kidney
new patient: 
 
a patient who has not received professional services
from the physician or another physician of the exact same specialty
and subspeciality in the same group within the past 3 years
newborn care: 
 
the evaluation and determination of care management
of a newly born infant
noninvasive: 
 
not entering the body, not breaking the skin
nonselective catheter placement: 
 
catheter or needle that is not
manipulated and is placed directly into an artery or vein or is
placed only into the aorta from any approach
NOS: 
 
not otherwise specified
nuclear cardiology: 
 
diagnostic specialty that uses
radiopharmaceuticals to aid in the diagnosis of cardiologic
conditions
nystagmus: 
 
rapid involuntary eye movements
objective information: 
 
findings observed by the physician during an
examination
OBRA (Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989): 
 
act that
established new rules for Medicare reimbursement
ocul/o-: 
 
prefix meaning eye
ocular adnexa: 
 
orbit, extraocular muscles, and eyelid
office visit: 
 
a direct encounter between a physician and a patient in
the physician’s private office to allow for primary management of
a patient’s health care status
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting: 
 
rules of coding
diagnosis codes (ICD-10-CM, ICD-9-CM) published by CMS and
NCHS
omentum: 
 
peritoneal connection between the stomach and other
internal organs
oophor-: 
 
prefix meaning ovary
oophorectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the ovary(ies)
opacification: 
 
area that has become opaque (milky)
open treatment: 
 
fracture site that is surgically opened and visualized
ophthalmodynamometry: 
 
test of the blood pressure of the eye
ophthalmology: 
 
body of knowledge regarding the eyes
optokinetic: 
 
movement of the eyes to objects moving in the visual
field
orchiectomy: 
 
castration
orchiopexy: 
 
fixation or suturing of an undescended testicle to secure
it in the scrotum
orthoptic: 
 
corrective; in the correct place
osteotomy: 
 
cutting into bone
ostomy: 
 
artificial opening
oto-: 
 
prefix meaning ear
-otomy: 
 
suffix meaning incision into
outpatient: 
 
a patient who receives services in an ambulatory health
care facility and is currently not an inpatient
overdose: 
 
excessive dose
oviduct: 
 
fallopian tube
pacemaker: 
 
electrical device that controls the beating of the heart by
electrical impulses
paraesophageal hiatal hernia: 
 
hernia that is near the esophagus
parathyroid: 
 
produces a hormone to mobilize calcium from the bones
to the blood
paring: 
 
removal of thin layers of skin by peeling or scraping
Part A: 
 
Medicare’s Hospital Insurance; covers hospital/facility care
Part B: 
 
Medicare’s Supplemental Medical Insurance; covers physician
services and durable medical equipment that are not paid for
under Part A
Part C: 
 
Medicare Advantage is a set of health care options from
which beneficiaries choose health care providers
Part D: 
 
Medicare’s prescription drug program
participating provider program: 
 
Medicare providers who have
agreed in advance to accept assignment on all Medicare claims;
now termed QIO
pathologic fracture: 
 
fracture due to a bone disease or a change
surrounding the bone tissue that makes the bone weak
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA): 
 
a system that allows the patient
to self-administer an analgesic drug, such as morphine, to control
pain. A hand-held device is attached to a pump holding the drug
and the patient can depress a button to administer a dose of the
drug. In this way, the patient can control the amount of the drug,
frequency of administration, and manage postoperative pain. The
system is used with patients with chronic pain.
pelviolithotomy: 
 
pyeloplasty
penoscrotal: 
 
referring to the penis and scrotum
percutaneous: 
 
through the skin
percutaneous skeletal fixation: 
 
considered neither open nor closed;
the fracture is not visualized, but fixation is placed across the
fracture site under x-ray imaging
pericardiocentesis: 
 
procedure in which a surgeon withdraws fluid
from the pericardial space by means of a needle inserted
percutaneously into the space
pericarditis: 
 
inflammation of the sac surrounding the first few
centimeters of great vessels and the heart
pericardium: 
 
membranous sac enclosing the heart and the ends of
the great vessels
perineal approach: 
 
surgical approach in the area between the thighs
perinephric cyst: 
 
cyst in the tissue around the kidney
perineum: 
 
area between the vulva and anus
peripheral nerves: 
 
12 pairs of cranial nerves, 31 pairs of spinal
nerves, and autonomic nervous system; connects peripheral
receptors to the brain and spinal cord
perirenal: 
 
around the kidney
peritoneal: 
 
within the lining of the abdominal cavity
peritoneoscopy: 
 
visualization of the abdominal cavity using one
scope placed through a small incision in the abdominal wall and
another scope placed in the vagina
perivesical: 
 
around the bladder
perivisceral: 
 
around an organ
pharyngolaryngectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the pharynx and larynx
phlebotomy: 
 
cutting into a vein
phonocardiogram: 
 
recording of heart sounds
photochemotherapy: 
 
treatment by means of drugs that react to
ultraviolet radiation or sunlight
physical status modifiers: 
 
modifying units in the Anesthesia section
of the CPT manual that describe a patient’s condition at the time
anesthesia is administered
physician: 
 
legally qualified to practice medicine; CPT definition
includes other qualified health care professional
physics: 
 
scientific study of energy
-plasty: 
 
suffix meaning technique involving molding or surgically
forming
plethysmography: 
 
determining the changes in volume of an organ
part or body
pleura: 
 
covering of the lungs and thoracic cavity that is moistened
with serous fluid to reduce friction during respiratory movements
of the lungs
pleurectomy: 
 
surgical excision of the pleura
pneumo-: 
 
prefix meaning lung or air
pneumonocentesis: 
 
surgical puncturing of a lung to withdraw fluid
pneumonolysis: 
 
surgical separation of the lung from the chest wall to
allow the lung to collapse
pneumonostomy: 
 
surgical procedure in which the chest cavity is
exposed and the lung is incised
pneumonotomy: 
 
incision of the lung
pneumoplethysmography: 
 
determining the changes in the volume of
the lung
polyp: 
 
tumor on a pedicle that bleeds easily and may become
malignant
polysomnography: 
 
measurement of the brain waves and various
stages of sleep during sleep
posterior (dorsal): 
 
in back of
posterior segment: 
 
those parts of the eye behind the lens
posterior synechiae: 
 
adhesions of the iris to the lens of the eye
posteroanterior: 
 
from back to front
postoperative: 
 
period of time after a surgical procedure
postpartum: 
 
after childbirth
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO): 
 
a group of providers who
form a network and who have agreed to provide services to
enrollees at a discounted rate
preoperative: 
 
period of time prior to a surgical procedure
priapism: 
 
painful condition in which the penis is constantly erect
primary diagnosis: 
 
first-listed diagnosis, used in the outpatient
setting to identify the reason for the encounter
primary site: 
 
site of origin or where the tumor originated
principal diagnosis: 
 
defined in the Uniform Hospital Discharge Data
Set (UHDDS) as “that condition established after study to be
chiefly responsible for occasioning the admission of the patient to
the hospital for care”; the principal diagnosis is sequenced first
proctosigmoidoscopy: 
 
fiberscopic examination of the sigmoid colon
and rectum
professional component: 
 
term used in describing physician’s
services in radiology or pathology
prognosis: 
 
probable outcome of an illness
prophylactic: 
 
substance or agent that offers some protection from
disease
PROs (Peer Review Organizations): 
 
groups established to review
hospital admission and care; now termed QIO
prostatotomy: 
 
incision into the prostate
PSRO (Professional Standards Review Organization): 
 
voluntary
physicians’ organization designed to monitor the necessity of
hospital admissions, treatment costs, and medical records of
hospitals
punch: 
 
use of a small hollow instrument to puncture a lesion
pyelo-: 
 
prefix meaning renal pelvis
pyelocutaneous: 
 
from the renal pelvis to the skin
pyelography: 
 
radiographic recording of the kidneys, renal pelvis,
ureters, and bladder
pyelolithotomy: 
 
surgical removal of a kidney stone from the renal
pelvis
pyeloplasty: 
 
surgical reconstruction of the renal pelvis
pyeloscopy: 
 
viewing of the renal pelvis using a fluoroscope after
injection of contrast material
pyelostolithotomy: 
 
removal of a kidney stone and establishment of a
stoma
pyelostomy: 
 
surgical creation of a temporary diversion around the
ureter
pyelotomy: 
 
incision into the renal pelvis
pyloroplasty: 
 
incision and repair of the pyloric channel
QIO (Quality Improvement Organization): 
 
consists of a national
network of 53 entities that work with consumers, physicians,
hospitals, and caregivers to refine care delivery systems
qualifying circumstances: 
 
five-digit CPT codes that describe
situations or conditions that affect the administration of anesthesia
qualitative: 
 
measuring the presence or absence of
quantitative: 
 
measuring the presence or absence of and the amount
of
rad: 
 
radiation absorption dose, the energy deposited in patients’
tissues
radiation oncology: 
 
branch of medicine concerned with the
application of radiation to a tumor site for treatment (destruction)
of cancerous tumors
radiograph: 
 
film on which an image is produced through exposure to
x-radiation
radiologist: 
 
physician who specializes in the use of radioactive
materials in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and illnesses
radiology: 
 
branch of medicine concerned with the use of radioactive
substances for diagnosis and therapy
RBRVS (Resource-Based Relative Value Scale): 
 
scale designed to
decrease Medicare expenditures, redistribute physician payment,
and ensure quality health care at reasonable rates
real time: 
 
two-dimensional display of both the structures and the
motion of tissues and organs, with the length of time also recorded
as part of the study
reanastomosis: 
 
reconnection of a previous connection between two
places, organs, or spaces
rectocele: 
 
herniation of the rectal wall through the posterior wall of
the vagina
reducible: 
 
able to be corrected or put back into a normal position
referral: 
 
the transfer of the total or a specific portion of care of a
patient from one physician to another that does not constitute a
consultation
regional anesthesia: 
 
the interruption of the sensory nerve
conductivity in a region of the body, which is produced by field
block (forming a wall of anesthesia around the site by means of
local injections) or by nerve block (injection of the area close to the
major sensory nerve supplying a field); also known as block
anesthesia, block, or conduction anesthesia
Relative Value Guide®: 
 
comparison of anesthesia services;
published by the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
renal pelvis: 
 
funnel-shaped sac in the kidney where urine is received
repair: 
 
to remedy, replace, or heal (in the Integumentary subsection
pertains to suturing a wound)
residual: 
 
that which is left behind or remains
resource intensity: 
 
refers to the relative volume and type of
diagnostic, therapeutic, and bed services used in the management
of a particular illness
retrograde: 
 
moving backward or against the usual direction of flow
retroperitoneal: 
 
behind the sac holding the abdominal organs and
viscera (peritoneum)
rhino-: 
 
prefix meaning nose
rhinoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the nose
-rrhaphy: 
 
suffix meaning suturing
rubric: 
 
heading used as a direction or explanation as to what follows
and the way in which the information is to be used. In ICD-10-CM
coding, the rubric is the three-digit code that precedes the four to
seven characters. In ICD-9-CM coding, the rubric is the three-digit
code that precedes the four- and five-digit codes
rule of nines: 
 
rule used to estimate burned body surface area in burn
patients
RUQ: 
 
right upper quadrant
RVU (Relative Value Unit): 
 
unit value that has been assigned for
each service
salpingectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the uterine tube
salping(o)-: 
 
prefix meaning tube
salpingostomy: 
 
creation of a fistula into the uterine tube
scan: 
 
mapping of emissions of radioactive substances after they have
been introduced into the body; the density can determine normal
or abnormal conditions
sclera: 
 
the white, outer covering of the eye
scoliosis: 
 
abnormal lateral curvature of the spine
secondary site: 
 
place to which a malignant tumor has spread;
metastatic site
section: 
 
slice of a frozen block
sections: 
 
the six major areas into which all CPT codes and
descriptions are categorized
See
: 
 
a cross-reference term within the index of the CPT manual used
to direct the coder to another term or other terms. The See indicates
that the correct code will be found elsewhere.
segmentectomy: 
 
surgical removal of a portion of a lung
selective catheter placement: 
 
catheter must be moved, manipulated,
or guided into part of the arterial system other than the aorta or the
vessel punctured, generally under fluoroscopic guidance
seminal vesicle: 
 
gland that secretes fluid that ultimately becomes
semen
sentinel node: 
 
the first lymph node to receive drainage from a tumor;
used to determine whether there is a lymphatic metastasis in
certain types of cancer
separate procedures: 
 
minor procedures that when done by
themselves are coded as a procedure, but when performed at the
same time as a major procedure are considered incidental and not
coded separately
septoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the nasal septum
sequela: 
 
a condition that follows an illness
severity of illness: 
 
refers to the levels of loss of function and
mortality that may be experienced by patients with a particular
disease
shaving: 
 
horizontal or transverse removal of dermal or epidermal
lesions, without full-thickness excision
shunt: 
 
divert or make an artificial passage
sialography: 
 
radiographic recording of the salivary duct and
branches
sigmoidoscopy: 
 
fiberscopic examination of the rectum and sigmoid
colon that may include a portion of the descending colon
signal-averaged electrocardiography (SAECG): 
 
type of
electrocardiography that can help physicians predict certain
tendencies to abnormalities such as ventricular tachycardia
signal node: 
 
the first lymph node that may “signal” a malignant
neoplasm’s presence
single chamber pacemaker: 
 
the electrode of the pacemaker is placed
only in the atrium or only in the ventricle, but not placed in both
sinography: 
 
radiographic recording of the sinus or sinus tract
sinus tract: 
 
a cyst or abscess inside the body with a tract (otherwise
known as a fistula)
sinuses:
 
 
cavities within the facial bones (maxillary, frontal, sphenoid,
and ethmoid)
sinusotomy: 
 
surgical incision into a sinus
skin graft: 
 
transplantation of skin tissue
skull: 
 
entire skeletal framework of the head
slanted brackets: 
 
indicate that the ICD-10-CM code can never be
sequenced as the principal or primary diagnosis
soft tissue: 
 
tissues (fascia, connective tissue, muscle, and so forth)
somatic nerve: 
 
sensory or motor nerve that supplies a dermatome
special reports: 
 
detailed reports that include adequate definitions or
descriptions of the nature, extent, and need for the procedure and
the time, effort, and equipment necessary to provide the services
specimen: 
 
sample of tissue or fluid
spermatocele: 
 
cyst filled with spermatozoa
spirometry: 
 
measurement of breathing capacity
splenectomy: 
 
excision of the spleen
splenography: 
 
radiographic recording of the spleen
splenoportography: 
 
radiographic procedure to allow visualization of
the splenic and portal veins of the spleen
spontaneous fracture: 
 
fracture due to a bone disease or a change
surrounding the bone tissue that makes the bone weak
Staff Model: 
 
a Health Maintenance Organization that directly
employs the physicians who provide services to enrollees
stem cell: 
 
immature blood cell
stent: 
 
mold that is surgically placed to reinforce or hold open an area
stereotaxis: 
 
method of identifying a specific area or point in the brain
strabismus: 
 
extraocular muscle deviation resulting in unequal visual
axes
strangulated hernia: 
 
blood supply is cut off to hernia
subcutaneous: 
 
tissue below the dermis, primarily fat cells that
insulate the body
subjective information: 
 
complaint or problem in the history portion
of the encounter that is usually described by the patient
subsections: 
 
the further division of sections into smaller units,
usually by body systems
superior: 
 
toward the head or the upper part of the body; also known
as cephalic
supine: 
 
lying on the back
surgical package: 
 
bundling together of time, effort, and services for a
specific procedure into one code instead of reporting each
component separately
suture: 
 
to unite parts by stitching them together
Swan-Ganz catheter: 
 
central venous catheter
symbols: 
 
special guides that help the coder compare codes and
descriptors with the previous edition. A bullet (●) is used to
indicate a new procedure or service code added since the previous
edition of the CPT manual. A solid triangle (
▴
) placed in front of a
code number indicates that the code has been changed or modified
since the last edition. A plus (+) is used to indicate an add-on code.
A circle with a line through it () is used to identify a modifier -51
exempt code. Right and left triangles (
▶◂
) indicate the beginning
and end of the text changes. A lightning bolt symbol (~) identifies
codes that are being tracked by the AMA to monitor FDA status
for approval of a drug.
sympathetic nerve: 
 
part of the peripheral nervous system that
controls automatic body function and sympathetic nerves activated
under stress
symphysiotomy: 
 
cutting of the pubic cartilage to help in birthing
systemic: 
 
affecting the entire body
tarsorrhaphy: 
 
suturing together of the eyelids
technical component: 
 
term used in describing the services provided
by the facility
TEFRA (Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act): 
 
act that contains
language to reward cost-conscious health care providers
tenodesis: 
 
suturing the end of a tendon to a bone
tenorrhaphy: 
 
suturing together two parts of a tendon
term location methods: 
 
service/procedure, anatomic site/body organ,
condition/disease, synonym, eponym, and abbreviation
thermogram: 
 
written record of temperature variation
thoracentesis: 
 
surgical puncture of the thoracic cavity, usually using
a needle, to remove fluids
thoracic duct: 
 
collection and distribution point for lymph, and the
largest lymph vessel located in the chest
thoracoplasty: 
 
surgical procedure that removes rib(s) to allow the
collapse of a lung
thoracoscopy: 
 
use of a lighted endoscope to view the pleural spaces
and thoracic cavity or perform surgical procedures
thoracostomy: 
 
surgical incision into the chest wall and insertion of a
chest tube
thoracotomy: 
 
surgical incision into the chest wall
thrombosis: 
 
blood clot
thrombus: 
 
blood clot that occludes, or shuts off, a vessel
thymectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the thymus
thymus: 
 
gland that produces hormones important to the immune
response
thyroglossal duct: 
 
a duct in the embryo between the thyroid
primordium and the posterior tongue
thyroglossal duct cyst: 
 
a cyst of the neck caused by persistence of
portions of or by the lack of closure of the primitive thyroglossal
duct
thyroid: 
 
part of the endocrine system that produces hormones that
regulate metabolism
thyroidectomy: 
 
surgical removal of the thyroid
thyroiditis: 
 
a thyroid gland inflammation
tissue transfer: 
 
piece of skin for grafting that is still partially attached
to the original blood supply and is used to cover an adjacent
wound area
tocolysis: 
 
repression of uterine contractions
tomography:
 
 
procedure that allows viewing of a single plane of the
body by blurring out all but that particular level
tonography: 
 
recording of changes in intraocular pressure in response
to sustained pressure on the eyeball
tonometry: 
 
measurement of pressure or tension
total pneumonectomy: 
 
surgical removal of an entire lobe of a lung
tracheostomy: 
 
creation of an opening into the trachea
tracheotomy: 
 
incision into the trachea
traction: 
 
application of force to a limb
transabdominal: 
 
across the abdomen
transcutaneous: 
 
entering by way of the skin
transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE): 
 
echocardiogram performed
by placing a probe down the esophagus and sending out sound
waves to obtain images of the heart and its movement
transfer order: 
 
official document that transfers the care of a patient
from one physician to another; often required by third-party
payers to legally transfer the care of a patient
transglottic tracheoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the vocal apparatus and
trachea
transhepatic: 
 
across the liver
transmastoid antrostomy: 
 
called a simple mastoidectomy, it creates
an opening in the mastoid for drainage
transplantation: 
 
grafting of tissue from one source to another
transseptal: 
 
through the septum
transthoracic: 
 
across the thorax
transtracheal: 
 
across the trachea
transureteroureterostomy: 
 
surgical connection of one ureter to the
other ureter
transurethral resection, prostate: 
 
procedure performed through the
urethra by means of a cystoscopy to remove part or all of the
prostate
transvenous: 
 
across a vein
transverse: 
 
horizontal
transvesical ureterolithotomy: 
 
removal of a ureter stone (calculus)
through the bladder
trocar needle: 
 
a sharp-pointed instrument equipped with a cannula,
used to puncture the wall of a body cavity and withdraw fluid
tumescence: 
 
state of being swollen
tumor: 
 
swelling or enlargement; a spontaneous growth of tissue that
forms an abnormal mass
tunica vaginalis: 
 
covering of the testes
tympanic neurectomy: 
 
excision of the tympanic nerve
tympanometry: 
 
procedure for evaluating middle ear disorders
UHDDS: 
 
Uniform Hospital Discharge Data Set
ultrasound: 
 
technique using sound waves to determine the density of
the outline of tissue
unbundling: 
 
assigning multiple CPT codes when one CPT code
would fully describe the service or procedure
uncertain behavior: 
 
refers to the behavior of a neoplasm as being
neither malignant nor benign but having characteristics of both
kinds of activity
uncertain diagnosis: 
 
diagnosis documented at the time of discharge
as “probable, ” “suspected, ” “likely, ” “questionable, ” “possible, ”
or “rule out”
unilateral: 
 
occurring on one side
unlisted procedures: 
 
procedures that are considered unusual,
experimental, or new and do not have a specific code number
assigned; unlisted procedure codes are located at the end of the
subsections or subheadings and may be used to identify any
procedure that lacks a specific code
unspecified hypertension: 
 
hypertensive condition that has not been
specified as either benign or malignant hypertension
unspecified nature: 
 
when the behavior or histology of a neoplasm is
not known or is not specified
uptake: 
 
absorption of a radioactive substance by body tissues;
recorded for diagnostic purposes in conditions such as thyroid
disease
urachal cyst: 
 
between the umbilicus and bladder dome, often
diagnosed in young children when the cyst becomes infected
urachal sinus: 
 
congenital abnormality in which prenatal tissue
remains, causes drainage to the umbilicus, and results in infection
and umbilicus drainage
ureterectomy: 
 
surgical removal of a ureter, either totally or partially
ureterocolon: 
 
pertaining to the ureter and colon
ureterocutaneous fistula: 
 
the channel from the ureter to the exterior
skin
ureteroenterostomy: 
 
creation of a connection between the intestine
and the ureter
ureterolithotomy: 
 
removal of a stone from the ureter
ureterolysis: 
 
freeing of adhesions of the ureter
ureteroneocystostomy: 
 
surgical connection of the ureter to a new site
on the bladder
ureteroplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the ureter
ureteropyelography: 
 
ureter and bladder radiography
ureteropyelonephrostomy: 
 
surgical connection of the ureter to a new
site on the kidney
ureteropyelostomy: 
 
ureteropyelonephrostomy
ureterosigmoidostomy: 
 
surgical connection of the ureter into the
sigmoid colon and out through a new opening in the skin
ureterotomy: 
 
incision into the ureter
ureterovisceral fistula: 
 
surgical formation of a connection between
the ureter and the bladder
urethrocutaneous fistula: 
 
surgically created channel from the urethra
to the skin surface
urethrocystography: 
 
radiography of the bladder and urethra
urethromeatoplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the urethra and meatus
urethroplasty: 
 
surgical repair of the urethra
urethrorrhaphy: 
 
suturing of the urethra
urethroscopy: 
 
use of a scope to view the urethra
urography: 
 
same as pyelography; radiographic recording of the
kidneys, renal pelvis, ureters, and bladder
uveal: 
 
vascular tissue of the choroid, ciliary body, and iris
vagina: 
 
canal from the external female genitalia to the uterus
vagotomy: 
 
surgical separation of the vagus nerve
Valium: 
 
a sedative
varicocele: 
 
swelling of a scrotal vein
vas deferens: 
 
tube that carries sperm from the epididymis to the
urethra
vasogram: 
 
recording of the flow in the vas deferens
vasotomy: 
 
creation of an opening in the vas deferens
vasovasorrhaphy: 
 
suturing of the vas deferens
vasovasostomy: 
 
reversal of a vasectomy
VBAC: 
 
vaginal delivery after a previous cesarean delivery
vectorcardiogram (VCG): 
 
continuous recording of electrical direction
and magnitude of the heart
vein: 
 
vessel that carries unoxygenated blood to the heart from body
tissues; pulmonary veins carry oxygenated blood back to the heart
vena caval thrombectomy: 
 
removal of a blood clot from the blood
vessel (inferior vena cava or superior vena cava)
venography: 
 
radiographic recording of the veins and tributaries
ventricle: 
 
chamber in the lower part of the heart
version: 
 
turning of the fetus from a presentation other than cephalic
(head down) to cephalic for ease of birth
vesicostomy: 
 
surgical creation of a connection of the bladder mucosa
to the skin
vesicovaginal fistula: 
 
creation of a tube between the vagina and the
bladder
vesiculectomy: 
 
excision of the seminal vesicle
vesiculography: 
 
radiographic recording of the seminal vesicles
vesiculotomy: 
 
incision into the seminal vesicle
vitre/o-: 
 
prefix meaning pertaining to the vitreous body of the eye
vulva: 
 
external female genitalia including the labia majora, labia
minora, clitoris, and vaginal opening
World Health Organization (WHO): 
 
group that deals with health
care issues on a global basis
wound repair, complex: 
 
involves complicated wound closure,
including revision, debridement, extensive undermining, and more
than layered closure
wound repair, intermediate: 
 
requires closure of one or more
subcutaneous tissues and superficial fascia, in addition to the skin
closure
wound repair, simple: 
 
superficial wound repair, involving
epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue, requiring only simple,
one-layer suturing
xeroradiography: 
 
photoelectric process of radiographs
Z codes: 
 
numeric designations in the ICD-10-CM preceded by the
letter “Z”; used to classify persons who are not currently sick when
they encounter health services
Figure credits
Introduction
Figures 1, 
2:
 (From Dick MA, Alanis P: 2015 Salary Survey:
Credentials Tip the Scale, 
AAPC
 (website):
https://www.aapc.com/blog/33226-2015-salary-survey-credentials-tip-
the-scale/
. Accessed August 25, 2016.) 
3
: (Modified from Dick MA,
Alanis P: 2015 Salary Survey: Credentials Tip the Scale, 
AAPC
(website): 
https://www.aapc.com/blog/33226-2015-salary-survey-
credentials-tip-the-scale/
. Accessed August 25, 2016.)
Chapter 1
Figure 1-1
: Modified from Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services: 
A/B MAC Jurisdictions
 (website):
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Contracting/Medicare-
Administrative-Contractors/A-B_MAC_Jurisdictions.html. Accessed
March 10, 2015. 
1-2
: Modified from Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services: 
DME MAC Jurisdictions
 (website):
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Contracting/Medicare-
Administrative-Contractors/DME-MAC-Jurisdictions.html
. Accessed
March 10, 2015. 
1-3
: From 
Federal Register, 
January 19, 2016, Vol 81, No
11, Proposed Rules.
Chapter 2
Figures 2-1
, 
2-2
, 
2-5
A
, 
2-6
, 
2-7
, 
2-8
: Courtesy U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. 
2-3
, 
2-4
, 
2-5
B
, 
2-10
, 
2-11
, 
2-12
, 
2-13
, 
2-14
, 
2-15
, 
2-16
, 
2-17
, 
2-
18
, 
2-19
, 
2-20
, 
2-21
, 
2-22
, 
2-23
, 
2-24
, 
2-25
, 
2-26
, 
2-27
, 
2-28
: From Buck
CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-CM Hospital Professional Edition
, St. Louis, 2017,
Elsevier. 
2-9
: Courtesy U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Chapter 3
Figure 3-1
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-CM Hospital Professional
Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier.
Chapter 4
Figures 4-1
, 
4-2
, 
4-3
, 
4-4
, 
4-5
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-CM
Hospital Professional Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier.
Chapter 5
Figures 5-1
, 
5-2
, 
5-3
, 
5-4
, 
5-5
, 
5-6
, 
5-7
, 
5-8
, 
5-9
, 
5-10
, 
5-11
, 
5-12
, 
5-13
,
5-14
, 
5-20
, 
5-22
, 
5-23
, 
5-24
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-CM Hospital
Professional Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier. 
5-18
A, 
5-19
A
: From
Frazier MS, Drzymkowski JW: 
Essentials of Human Diseases and
Conditions, 
ed 5, St. Louis, 2013, Saunders. 
5-18
B
: From Seidel HM, Ball
JW, Dains JE, Benedict GW, 
Mosby’s Guide to Physical Examination, 
ed
6, St. Louis, 2006, Mosby Elsevier. 
5-19
B
: From Ignatavicius DD,
Workman ML: 
Medical-Surgical Nursing: Critical Thinking for
Collaborative Care, 
ed 5, St. Louis, 2006, Saunders.
Chapter 6
Figures 6-1
, 
6-2
, 
6-4
, 
6-5
, 
6-6
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-CM
Hospital Professional Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier.
Chapter 7
Figures 7-1
, 
7-3
, 
7-4
, 
7-5
, 
7-6
, 
7-7
, 
7-8
, 
7-9
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-
10-CM Hospital Professional Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier. 
7-2
: From
Damjanov I: 
Pathology for the Health Professions, 
ed 4, St. Louis, 2012,
Elsevier.
Chapter 8
Figure 8-1
: Courtesy U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Chapter 9
Figures 9-1
, 
9-2
, 
9-3
, 
9-4
, 
9-5
, 
9-6
, 
9-7
, 
9-9
, 
9-10
, 
9-14
, 
9-15
: From Buck
CJ; 
2017 HCPCS Level II Professional Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier. 
9-
8
, 
9-11
, 
9-12
, 
9-13
: Courtesy U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Chapter 10
Figure 10-2
: Courtesy U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Chapter 11
Figures 11-9
, 
11-10
: Courtesy U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Chapter 12
Figure 12-1
B
: From Stack RS, Roubin GS, O’Neill WW: 
Interventional
Cardiovascular Medicine: Principles and Practice, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2002,
Churchill Livingstone. 
12-3
: From Potter PA, Perry AG: 
Basic Nursing:
Essentials for Practice, 
ed 6, St. Louis, 2007, Mosby. 
12-6
, 
12-7
, 
12-10
, 
12-
11
: Excerpted from 
2016 Relative Value Guide®, 
© 2015 The American
Society of Anesthesiologists. All Rights Reserved. 
Relative Value Guide
is a registered trademark of the American Society of Anesthesiologists
. A
copy of the full text can be obtained from ASA, 1061 American Lane,
Schaumburg, Illinois, 60173-4973. 
12-8
: Courtesy U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. 
12-9
A
 and 
B
: Courtesy U.S. General Services Administration.
Chapter 13
Figure 13-9
: From Forbes CD, Jackson WF: 
Color Atlas and Text of
Clinical Medicine, 
ed 3, 2003, Mosby.
Chapter 14
Figure 14-1
: From Forbes CD, Jackson WF: 
Color Atlas and Text of
Clinical Medicine, 
ed 3, 2003, Mosby. 
14-2
: From Kumar V, Abbas AK,
Fausto N, Aster JC: 
Robbins and Cotran: Pathologic Basis of Disease, 
ed 8,
Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders. 
14-5
B
: Courtesy Mary Garden. 
14-6
C
:
From Roberts JR, Hedges JR, editors: 
Clinical Procedures in Emergency
Medicine, 
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders. 
14-7
, From Habif TP:
Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy, 
ed 4,
Philadelphia, 2004, Mosby. 
14-9
: Courtesy U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
14-
10
A
, 
14-12
: From Habif TP: 
Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to
Diagnosis and Therapy, 
ed 5, Philadelphia, 2010, Mosby. 
14-13
: From
Burkitt HG, Quick CRG: 
Essential Surgery, 
ed 3, 2002, Churchill
Livingstone. 
14-14
: Modified from Buck CJ: 
2016 HCPCS Level II
Professional Edition, 
St. Louis, 2016, Elsevier. 
14-15
: From Rakel RE:
Saunders Manual of Medical Practice, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders.
14-17
B
: From Henry MC, Stapleton ER: 
EMT Prehospital Care-Revised
Reprint, 
ed 4, St. Louis, 2012, Mosby Jems. 
14-7
D
: From Henry MC,
Stapleton ER: 
EMT Prehospital Care, 
ed 3, St. Louis, 2004, MosbyJems.
14-17
F
 and 
H
: From McCance KL, Huether SE: 
Pathophysiology: The
Biologic Basis for Disease in Adults and Children, 
ed 6, St. Louis, 2010,
Mosby. 
14-18:
 From deWit SC: 
Fundamental Concepts and Skills for
Nursing, 
ed 4, St. Louis, 2014, Saunders. 
14-19:
 From Robinson JK,
Hanke CW, Siegel DM, Fratila A, editors: 
Surgery of the Skin: Procedural
Dermatology, 
ed 2, Edinburgh, 2010, Mosby. 
14-21
A
 and 
B
: From
McCarthy, JG, ed: 
Plastic Surgery, 
vol 6, Philadelphia, 1990, WB
Saunders. 
14-21
C
 and 
D
: From Converse JM, ed: 
Reconstructive Plastic
Surgery: Principles and Procedures in Correction, Reconstruction and
Transplantation, 
vol 5, Philadelphia, 1964, WB Saunders. 
14-23
: From
Achauer BM, et al, eds: 
Plastic Surgery: Indications, Operations, and
Outcomes, 
vol 4, St. Louis, 2000, Mosby. 
14-24
: From Ignatavicius DD,
Workman ML: 
Medical-Surgical Nursing: Patient-Centered Collaborative
Care, 
ed 7, St. Louis, 2013, Saunders. 
14-25
, 
14-26
: From Gallico GG,
O’Connor NE: Cultured epithelium as a skin substitute. 
Clin Plast Surg
12: 155, 1985. 
14-27
: From Bland KI, Copeland EM: 
The Breast:
Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Disorders, 
ed 3, St.
Louis, 2004, Saunders. 
14-28
, 
14-30
: From Flint PW, Haughey BH,
Lund VJ, Niparko JK, Richardson MA, Robbins KT, Thomas JR:
Cummings Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, 
ed 5, Philadelphia,
2010, Mosby. 
14-29
: From James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM: 
Andrew’s
Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology, 
ed 10, London, 2000, WB
Saunders. 
14-31
: From Regezi JA, Sciubba JJ, Jordan RCK: 
Oral
Pathology: Clinical Pathologic Correlations, 
ed 5, St. Louis, 2008,
Saunders. 
14-37
: From Converse JM, ed: 
Reconstructive Plastic Surgery:
Principles and Procedures in Correction, Reconstruction and
Transplantation, 
vol 1, Philadelphia, 1964, WB Saunders. 
14-39
:
Modified from Bland Kl, Copeland EM, eds: 
The Breast: Comprehensive
Management of Benign and Malignant Disorders, 
ed 3, St. Louis, 2004,
Saunders. 
14-40
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-CM Hospital Professional
Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier.
Chapter 15
Figure 15-7
: From 
Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 
ed 32,
Philadelphia, 2012, Saunders. 
15-9
: From Rakel RE: 
Saunders Manual of
Medical Practice, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders. 
15-10
: From Swan
KG, Swan RC: Principles of ballistics applicable to the treatment of
gunshot wounds. 
Surg Clin North Am
 71:221-239, 1991. 
15-11
: From
Swan, KG, Swan RC: 
Gunshot Wounds: Pathophysiology and
Management, 
ed 2, Chicago, Year Book Medical Publishers, Inc. 
15-13
B
:
from McCance KL, Huether SE: 
Pathophysiology: The Biologic Basis for
Disease in Adults and Children, 
ed 6, St. Louis, 2010, Mosby. 
15-14
: From
Canale ST, Beaty JH: 
Campbell’s Operative Orthopaedics, 
ed 12,
Philadelphia, 2013, Mosby. 
15-16
A
: From Fillit HM, Rockwood K,
Woodhouse K: 
Brocklehurst’s Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and
Gerontology, 
ed 7, Philadelphia, 2010, Saunders.
Chapter 16
Figure 16-3
A
: From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW: 
Atlas of Pediatric Physical
Diagnosis, 
ed 5, Philadelphia, 2007, Mosby. 
16-3
B
: From Monahan FD
et al: 
Phipps’ Medical-Surgical Nursing: Health and Illness Perspectives, 
ed
8, St. Louis, 2007, Mosby. 
16-8
: Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved. www.netterimages.com 
16-9
: Modified from Standring S,
editor: 
Gray’s Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, 
ed 40,
Philadelphia, 2008, Churchill Livingstone.
Chapter 17
Figures 17-5
, 
17-24
: From Forbes CD, Jackson WF: 
Color Atlas and
Text of Clinical Medicine, 
ed 3, 2003, Mosby. 
17-6
: From Miller RD,
editor: 
Miller’s Anesthesia, 
ed 8, Philadelphia, 2015, Saunders. 
17-7
B
:
From Lewis SL, Dirksen SR, Heitkemper MM, Bucher L, Camera IM:
Medical-Surgical Nursing: Assessment and Management of Clinical
Problems, 
ed 8, St. Louis, 2011, Mosby. 
17-8
B
: From Damjanov I:
Pathology for the Health Professions, 
ed 4, St. Louis, 2012, Saunders. 
17-9
:
From Monahan FD, Neighbors M: 
Medical-Surgical Nursing:
Foundations for Clinical Practice, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders. 
17-
14
: From Roberts JR, Hedges JR, eds: 
Clinical Procedures in Emergency
Medicine, 
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders. 
17-22
: From Young AP,
Proctor DB: 
Kinn’s The Medical Assistant: An Applied Learning Approach,
ed 10, St. Louis, 2007, Saunders. 
17-25
A: From Proctor DB, Adams AP:
Kinn’s The Medical Assistant: An Applied Learning Approach, 
ed 12, St.
Louis, 2014, Saunders. 
17-29
: From Zipes DP, editor: 
Braunwald’s Heart
Disease, 
ed 7, Philadelphia, 2005, Saunders. 
17-32
: From Bennett JC,
Plum F: 
Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 
ed 20, Philadelphia, 1996, WB
Saunders.
Chapter 18
Figure 18-2
: Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
www.netterimages.com
Chapter 19
Figure 19-2
: Modified from Liebgott B: 
The Anatomical Basis of
Dentistry, 
ed 3, St. Louis, 2011, Mosby, Inc. 
19-3
: From Kavanagh KT:
Abbe-Estlander Flap for Lip Reconstruction in a Patient with Skin
Cancer of the Lower Lip, Ear, Nose & Throat - U.S.A. (website):
www.entusa.com/abbe_estlander.htm
. Accessed February 18, 2016.
19-4
A
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-CM Hospital Professional Edition, 
St.
Louis, 2017, Elsevier. 
19-4
B
: From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW: 
Atlas of
Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 
ed 5, Philadelphia, 2007, Mosby.
19-4
C
:
Patton KT, Thibodeau GA: 
Anatomy & Physiology, 
ed 8, St. Louis, 2013,
Mosby. 
19-5
: From Coran AG, Adzick NS, Krummel TM, Laberge J-M,
Shamberger RC, Caldamone AA, et al, editors: 
Pediatric Surgery, 
ed 7,
Philadelphia, 2012, Saunders. 
19-6
: From Liebgott B:
The Anatomical
Basis of Dentistry, 
ed 3, St. Louis, 2011, Mosby. 
19-8
: From Marx JA,
Hockberger R, Walls R, editors: 
Rosen’s Emergency Medicine: Concepts
and Clinical Practice, 
ed 8, Philadelphia, 2014, Saunders. 
19-13
: From
Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ: 
Sleisenger & Fordtran’s
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 
ed 8, Philadelphia, 2006, Saunders.
19-14
B
 and 
C
: From Drake RL, Vogl W, Mitchell AWM: 
Gray’s
Anatomy for Students, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2010, Churchill Livingstone.
19-18
: Courtesy U.S. National Cancer Institute, Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program. 
19-21
: From
Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL: 
Sabiston
Textbook of Surgery, 
ed 19, Philadelphia, 2012, Saunders. 
19-22
: From
Roberts JR, Hedges JR, Chanmugam AS, Chudnofsky CR, Custalow
CB, Dronen SC: 
Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine, 
ed 4,
Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders. 
19-23
: From Roberts JR, Hedges JR,
editors: 
Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine, 
ed 4, Philadelphia,
2004, Saunders.
Chapter 20
Figure 20-4
: From White GM, Cox NH: 
Diseases of the Skin: A Color
Atlas and Text, 
ed 2, Edinburgh, 2006, Mosby. 
20-14
: Modified from
Wein AJ, editor: 
Campbell-Walsh Urology, 
ed 9, Philadelphia, 2007,
Saunders.
Chapter 21
Figure 21-2
: Modified from Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers
BM, Mattox KL: 
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery, 
ed 19, Philadelphia, 2012,
Saunders. 
21-3
: Modified from Sanfilippo JS, Muram D, Dewhurst J,
Lee PA: 
Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2001,
Saunders. 
21-4
: From DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT: 
Clinical Gynecologic
Oncology, 
ed 7, St. Louis, 2007, Mosby. 
21-5
: Modified from Gabbe SG,
Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, Landon MB, Galan H, Jauniaux ERM, Driscoll
DA: 
Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies, 
ed 6, Philadelphia,
2012, Saunders. 
21-6
: From Baggish MS: 
Colposcopy of the Cervix,
Vagina, and Vulva: A Comprehensive Textbook, 
Philadelphia, 2003,
Mosby. 
21-9
: From Katz VL, Lentz GM, Lobo RA, Gershenson DM:
Comprehensive Gynecology, 
ed 5, Philadelphia, 2007, Mosby. 
21-10
:
Modified from Goldman CC, Snyder TK: 
Differential Diagnosis for
Physical Therapists: Screening for Referral, 
ed 5, St. Louis, 2013,
Saunders. 
21-13
: From Roberts JR, Hedges JR, eds: 
Clinical Procedures
in Emergency Medicine, 
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders. 
21-14
: From
Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 
ed 32, Philadelphia, 2012,
Saunders. 
21-15
: From Damjanov I: 
Pathology for the Health Professions,
ed 4, St. Louis, 2012, Saunders.
Chapter 22
Figure 22-2
: Modified from Hall JE: 
Guyton and Hall Textbook of
Medical Physiology, 
ed 12, Philadelphia, 2011, Saunders. 
22-3
: From
Stoy WA, Platt TE, Lejeune DA: 
Mosby’s EMT-Basic Textbook, 
ed 2, St.
Louis, 2007, Mosby.
Chapter 23
Figure 23-7
: From Rothrock JC: 
Alexander’s Care of the Patient in
Surgery, 
ed 15, St. Louis, 2015, Mosby. 
23-8
A
, 
23-9
A
: From Frazier MS,
Drzymkowski JW: 
Essentials of Human Diseases and Conditions, 
ed 5, St.
Louis, 2013, Saunders. 
23-8
B
: From Ignatavicius DD, Workman ML:
Medical-Surgical Nursing: Critical Thinking for Collaborative Care, 
ed 5,
St. Louis, 2006, Saunders. 
23-9
B
: From Seidel HM, Ball JW, Dains JE,
Benedict GW: 
Mosby’s Guide to Physical Examination, 
ed 6, St. Louis,
2006, Mosby Elsevier. 
23-11
: Modified from Drake RL, Vogl W,
Mitchell AWM: 
Gray’s Anatomy for Students, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2010,
Churchill Livingstone. 
23-13
: From Microsurgery Instruments Inc.: 
The
Economic Operating Microscope
 (website):
www.microsurgeryusa.com/EOM.htm
. Accessed February 21, 2014.
23-14
: From Mopec: 
AK100 Binocular Magnifying Loupe
 (website):
http://www.mopec.com/anatomic-
pathology/products/instruments/dissection-
1844/miscellaneous/binocular-magnifying-loupe-1844
. Accessed
March 22, 2016.
Chapter 24
Figures 24-7
, 
24-14
: From Goldman L, Schafer AI, editors: 
Goldman’s
Cecil Medicine, 
ed 24, Philadelphia, 2012, Saunders. 
24-10
A
: From
Drake RL, Vogl W, Mitchell AWM: 
Gray’s Anatomy for Students, 
ed 2,
Philadelphia, 2010, Churchill Livingstone. 
24-10
B
, 
24-13
: From Stimac
GK: 
Introduction to Diagnostic Imaging, 
Philadelphia, 1992, WB
Saunders. 
24-11
: From Bragg DG, Rubin P, Hricak H: 
Oncologic
Imaging, 
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2002, Saunders. 
24-12
: Modified from
Bradley WG, Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J: 
Neurology in Clinical
Practice, 
ed 5, Philadelphia, 2008, Butterworth-Heinemann. 
24-15
:
From Tempkin BB: 
Ultrasound Scanning: Principles and Protocols, 
ed 3,
St. Louis, 2009, Saunders. 
24-16
: From Crownover RL, ed:
Hematology/Oncology Clinics of North America, 
Vol 13, Number 3, June
1999, p 645.
Chapter 25
Figure 25-1
: From Young AP, Proctor DB: 
Kinn’s The Medical
Assistant, 
ed 10, St. Louis, 2007, Saunders. 
25-2
: Courtesy National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences—National Institutes of
Health. 
25-3
: From Proctor DB, Adams AP: 
Kinn’s The Medical
Assistant: An Applied Learning Approach, 
ed 12, St. Louis, 2014,
Saunders. 
25-4
: From Clinical Diagnostic Solutions, Inc.: 
M-Series
Hematology Analyzer CAP.
 (website): 
www.cdsolinc.com/index.php?
main_page=product_info&cPath=7_44&products_id=97
. Accessed
February 18, 2016. 
25-6
: Courtesy United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
Chapter 26
Figure 26-4
: From Lewis SL, Dirksen SR, Heitkemper MM, Bucher
L, Camera IM: 
Medical-Surgical Nursing: Assessment and Management of
Clinical Problems, 
ed 8, St. Louis, 2011, Mosby. 
26-5
: From National Eye
Institute, National Institutes of Health: 
Ref#: EE69
 (website):
http://www.nei.nih.gov/photo/eye_exam/images/EE69_72.jpg
.
Accessed February 21, 2014. 
26-8
: From Gardenhire DS: 
Rau’s
Respiratory Care Pharmacology, 
ed 8, St. Louis, 2012, Mosby. 
26-9
: From
deWit SC: 
Fundamental Concepts and Skills for Nursing, 
ed 4, St. Louis,
2014, Saunders. 
26-10
: From DeLee JC, Drez D: 
DeLee & Drez’s
Orthopaedic Sports Medicine: Principles and Practice, 
ed 2, Philadelphia,
2003, Saunders. 
26-11
: From Goldman L, Schafer AI, editors: 
Goldman’s
Cecil Medicine, 
ed 24, Philadelphia, 2012, Saunders. 
26-13
: Courtesy
Argentum Medical, LLC. 
26-14
: From Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD,
Evers BM, Mattox KL: 
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery, 
ed 19, Philadelphia,
2012, Saunders.
Chapter 27
Figures 27-1
, 
27-2
, 
27-3
, 
27-4
, 
27-5
: From Buck CJ: 
2017 ICD-10-PCS
Professional Edition, 
St. Louis, 2017, Elsevier.
Coder’s index
References are to pages. Current Procedural Technology (CPT) codes begin
on page 791, ICD-10-CM codes begin on page 797, and HCPCS codes are on
page 799.
CPT codes
00100-01999: , 
214, 
256
00142: , 
358t
00635: , 
256
00740: , 
364
00810: , 
364
0095T: , 
223
01916-01936: , 
350
01922: , 
350t
01925: , 
350t
01951-01953: , 
350
01953: , 
354, 
355
01958-01969: , 
350
01968: , 
354
01969: , 
354
01990-01999: , 
350
01996: , 
355, 
605
01999: , 
362
10021: , 
268, 
368, 
377, 
565
10021-10022: , 
377
10021-69990: , 
214, 
268
10022: , 
377, 
380, 
450, 
565
10030: , 
273, 
383
10030-10036: , 
383
10035: , 
383
10036: , 
383
10040-10180: , 
383
10080: , 
375
10081: , 
375
10160: , 
383
11000: , 
16, 
211, 
384, 
385
11000-11047: , 
398
11001: , 
16, 
211, 
384, 
385
11010-11012: , 
384
11042: , 
385
11042-11047: , 
384, 
698
11043: , 
385
11044: , 
385
11055: , 
385
11055-11057: , 
387
11056: , 
385
11100: , 
264, 
409, 
441
11101: , 
264, 
409
11200: , 
389
11201: , 
389
11300-11313: , 
390
11400-11471: , 
390
11401: , 
265
11402: , 
262
11406: , 
261
11420-11426: , 
573
11423: , 
262
11440-11444: , 
509
11446: , 
509
11450-11471: , 
391
11600-11646: , 
391
11620-11626: , 
573
11640-11644: , 
509
11646: , 
509
11719: , 
392
11719-11765: , 
392
11720: , 
392
11730: , 
393
11732: , 
392, 
393
11740: , 
393
11750: , 
393
11755: , 
393
11770-11772: , 
394
11900: , 
394
11900-11983: , 
394
11901: , 
394
11920-11922: , 
394
11950-11954: , 
394
11960-11971: , 
394
11976-11981: , 
395
11980: , 
395
12001: , 
397
12001-12021: , 
395, 
407
12004: , 
376, 
376t, 
377, 
407
12020: , 
376t
12031-12057: , 
397
12031-13160: , 
390
12032: , 
261
13100-13160: , 
397
13131-13153: , 
509
14000-14350: , 
398
14040-14302: , 
512
15002-15005: , 
399
15002-15261: , 
399
15002-15278: , 
399–401
15040-15261: , 
401
15050: , 
400
15100: , 
399
15100-15278: , 
407
15101: , 
399
15110-15116: , 
400
15120: , 
399, 
611–612
15121: , 
399, 
611–612
15130-15136: , 
400
15150-15157: , 
400
15260: , 
611–612
15261: , 
611–612
15271: , 
401
15271-15278: , 
400
15272: , 
401
15273: , 
401
15274: , 
401
15275: , 
401
15276: , 
401
15277: , 
401
15278: , 
401
15501: , 
266
15570-15738: , 
401, 
405
15740-15750: , 
402
15740-15777: , 
401
15780-15781: , 
403
15780-15879: , 
403
15782: , 
403
15783: , 
403
15786: , 
403
15787: , 
403
15788-15793: , 
403
15819: , 
403–404
15820-15823: , 
403–404
15824-15829: , 
403–404
15830-15839: , 
403–404
15840-15845: , 
403
15847: , 
403
15850-15852: , 
403
15876-15879: , 
403–404
15920-15999: , 
404, 
405
15946: , 
265
16000-16036: , 
384, 
407
16020-16030: , 
406, 
407
16035: , 
407
16036: , 
407
17000-17004: , 
408
17000-17250: , 
390
17000-17286: , 
408
17003: , 
408
17004: , 
408
17260-17286: , 
391
17311: , 
409
17311-17315: , 
408–409, 
611
19000: , 
215
19000-19499: , 
410
19081-19086: , 
410
19100: , 
372–373, 
377
19101: , 
377
19281-19288: , 
410
19301: , 
410
19302: , 
410
19303: , 
261, 
268t, 
411
19304: , 
411
19305: , 
411
19306: , 
411
19307: , 
373, 
411
19316-19396: , 
411
19318: , 
411
19324: , 
411
19325: , 
411
19342: , 
394
19357: , 
394
19357-19369: , 
411
19499: , 
273
20005: , 
273, 
422, 
423
20005-69990: , 
273
20100-20103: , 
423
20150-20251: , 
424
20206: , 
424
20520: , 
218b
20520-20525: , 
424
20525: , 
218b
20550: , 
424
20551: , 
424
20553: , 
424
20600: , 
425
20600-20611: , 
425
20604: , 
425
20605: , 
425
20606: , 
425
20610: , 
425
20611: , 
425
20612: , 
425
20650: , 
426
20665: , 
426
20670: , 
426
20680: , 
426
20690: , 
426
20692: , 
426
20693: , 
427
20694: , 
427
20900-20938: , 
427
20920: , 
427–428
20922: , 
427–428
20930-20938: , 
428
20950: , 
428
20950-20999: , 
428
20955-20962: , 
428
20962: , 
428
20969-20973: , 
428
20974-20979: , 
428
20985: , 
428
21182: , 
208
21320: , 
418
21451: , 
260
22010-22899: , 
429
22210-22216: , 
429
22310-22325: , 
224b
22590-22600: , 
429
22600-22612: , 
429
22612: , 
262
22614: , 
429
22840-22848: , 
429
22853-22859: , 
429
22864: , 
223
23065-23066: , 
434
23100-23101: , 
434
23630: , 
418
24071: , 
424
25500: , 
418
25545: , 
427
25999: , 
371
26010: , 
218, 
383
26011: , 
218, 
383
26645: , 
224b
26650: , 
224b
26756: , 
264
27130: , 
417–418
27236: , 
417–418
27435: , 
433
27447: , 
260, 
261
27506: , 
419
27507: , 
419
27658: , 
263
27705: , 
218b
27707: , 
218b
27709: , 
218b
27784: , 
419
27792: , 
419
28285: , 
265
28292-28299: , 
430
28292: , 
430
28450: , 
436
28496: , 
419
29000-29799: , 
418, 
430
29800-29999: , 
433
29805: , 
433, 
434
29806: , 
433
29877: , 
433
29881: , 
433
30000: , 
440–441
30020: , 
440–441
30100: , 
441
30110: , 
442
30115: , 
442
30140: , 
443
30200: , 
442–443
30210: , 
442–443
30220: , 
442–443
30300: , 
443
30400: , 
438, 
443
30420: , 
438
30460: , 
510
30462: , 
510
30520: , 
443
30630: , 
443
30801: , 
443
30802: , 
443
30901: , 
444
30902: , 
444
31000: , 
445
31002: , 
445
31038: , 
707
31231: , 
439
31255: , 
264
31294: , 
439
31300: , 
446
31360: , 
516
31500: , 
325–326, 
449
31505: , 
218b, 
440
31510: , 
218b, 
514
31511: , 
218b
31512: , 
218b
31513: , 
218b
31515: , 
439, 
440, 
449
31535: , 
514
31536: , 
514
31599: , 
446
31603: , 
448
31605: , 
448
31622: , 
439
31717: , 
449
31730: , 
449
31750: , 
449
31770: , 
449
31830: , 
449
32035: , 
449
32141: , 
439
32405: , 
450
32501: , 
451
32655: , 
439
32905: , 
452
32960: , 
452
32999: , 
221, 
449
33010: , 
459, 
460, 
471
33011: , 
460, 
461
33015: , 
461
33020: , 
461–462
33050: , 
461–462
33120: , 
461–462
33130: , 
461–462
33140: , 
462
33141: , 
462
33202: , 
458, 
462
33206: , 
463
33207: , 
463
33208: , 
463
33249: , 
463
33250: , 
458, 
465
33250-33261: , 
488, 
489
33265: , 
465
33266: , 
458, 
465
33273: , 
458, 
462
33282: , 
465
33284: , 
465
33300: , 
465
33320: , 
465
33322: , 
465
33335: , 
465
33361: , 
465, 
466
33365: , 
466
33367: , 
466
33369: , 
466
33478: , 
465
33500: , 
466
33507: , 
466
33510: , 
275, 
468
33516: , 
468
33517: , 
468, 
469
33523: , 
468, 
469
33533: , 
468
33935: , 
274
33946: , 
469
33989: , 
469
33999: , 
221, 
459, 
460
34001: , 
459, 
469, 
473
34490: , 
473
34501-34530: , 
474
34800-34834: , 
474
34900: , 
474
35001-35152: , 
474
35180-35190: , 
474
35188: , 
474
35400: , 
474
35500-35671: , 
475
35506: , 
475
35820: , 
275
36000: , 
471, 
471b
36000-36522: , 
475
36012: , 
471, 
471b
36215: , 
472b, 
492
36217: , 
471–472, 
476
36218: , 
472, 
476
36245: , 
472b, 
653
36430: , 
661
36440: , 
337
36902: , 
474
36905: , 
474
36907: , 
474
37246-37249: , 
474
37211-37214: , 
479
37799: , 
459, 
469
38100-38200: , 
499
38100-38999: , 
498
38101: , 
499
38115: , 
224b, 
499
38120: , 
499
38129: , 
499
38200: , 
499
38205-38206: , 
499–500
38207-38215: , 
499–500
38220: , 
377, 
499–500, 
659
38221: , 
499–500
38230: , 
499–500
38240-38243: , 
499–500
38242: , 
499–500
38500: , 
500
38500-38555: , 
500
38510-38525: , 
500
38530: , 
500
38562-38564: , 
500
38570: , 
500
38570-38589: , 
500
38571: , 
500
38572: , 
500
38700: , 
501
38700-38780: , 
500, 
501
38720: , 
501
38724: , 
501
38790: , 
501
38792: , 
503
38900: , 
503
39000-39599: , 
503
39200: , 
504
39220: , 
504
39501-39599: , 
504
40490-40799: , 
509
40490-49999: , 
508
40500: , 
509
40510: , 
509
40510-40527: , 
509
40527: , 
509
40525: , 
509
40530: , 
509
40650: , 
509
40652: , 
509
40654: , 
509
40700: , 
510
40700-40761: , 
509
40701: , 
510
40702: , 
510
40720: , 
510
40800-40899: , 
510
40818: , 
512
41000-41009: , 
510–511
41000-41599: , 
510–511
41010: , 
511
41015-41018: , 
511
41100-41155: , 
511
41114: , 
511
41115: , 
511
41250-41252: , 
511
41520: , 
511
41800-41899: , 
510, 
512
41820: , 
512
41826: , 
512
41828: , 
512
42000-42299: , 
512
42120: , 
370
42145: , 
512
42200: , 
510
42200-42225: , 
512
42205: , 
510, 
515
42300-42699: , 
513
42400: , 
512–513
42405: , 
512–513
42410: , 
513
42440: , 
513
42450: , 
513
42509: , 
513
42550: , 
512–513
42700-42725: , 
514
42700-42999: , 
514
42800-42806: , 
514
42810: , 
514
42815: , 
514
42820-42836: , 
514–515
42950: , 
515
42955: , 
515
42955-42999: , 
515
42960-42972: , 
515
43020: , 
516
43020-43499: , 
516
43045: , 
516
43100: , 
516
43100-43135: , 
516
43101: , 
516
43104: , 
516
43116: , 
516
43124: , 
516
43180-43233: , 
516, 
517, 
521
43191: , 
516
43192: , 
517
43193: , 
517
43194: , 
517
43197: , 
516
43198: , 
517
43200: , 
373, 
516
43201: , 
517
43202: , 
517
43210: , 
516, 
519
43213: , 
517, 
518
43215: , 
517
43216: , 
517
43217: , 
517
43220: , 
516
43231: , 
516
43235-43259: , 
516, 
519, 
521
43236: , 
517
43239: , 
518
43245: , 
518
43259: , 
518
43260: , 
518
43260-43278: , 
518
43279-43289: , 
519
43405: , 
517
43450: , 
517
43453: , 
517
43460: , 
517
43500: , 
520
43500-43999: , 
520
43621: , 
520
43644: , 
520
43653: , 
520
43770-43775: , 
520
43820: , 
219
44005-44799: , 
521
44141: , 
521
44380-44408: , 
525
44900: , 
524
44950: , 
524
44955: , 
524
44960: , 
524
44970: , 
524
45000-45999: , 
524
45126: , 
524
45300: , 
524, 
525
45300-45327: , 
524
45303-45327: , 
524
45330: , 
524–525
45330-45350: , 
524–525
45331: , 
527
45331-45347: , 
526
45331-45350: , 
524–525
45332: , 
527
45333: , 
527
45335: , 
517
45338: , 
527
45346: , 
527
45378: , 
267, 
525, 
526, 
527
45378-45398: , 
525, 
526
45380: , 
525–526
45381: , 
517, 
528
45382: , 
528
45384: , 
271
45385: , 
271, 
526
45399: , 
525
46020: , 
529
46020-46999: , 
529
46030: , 
529
46200: , 
530
46270-46285: , 
529
46288: , 
530
46600: , 
530
46600-46615: , 
530
46900-46942: , 
530
46910: , 
530
46916: , 
530
47000: , 
531, 
639
47001: , 
531
47133-47147: , 
531
48000-48999: , 
596
48001: , 
532
48020: , 
532
48100: , 
532
48102: , 
532
48140-48160: , 
532
48400: , 
532
48550-48554: , 
532
49000: , 
522
49010: , 
538
49060: , 
538, 
539
49203-49205: , 
538
49320: , 
499, 
500, 
533, 
583
49323: , 
533
49406: , 
524
49427: , 
492
49491: , 
273
49491-49611: , 
533
49495-49501: , 
560
49496: , 
273
49568: , 
539
49650-49659: , 
533
50010: , 
538
50010-50135: , 
538
50010-50593: , 
538
50010-53899: , 
538
50020: , 
539
50045: , 
539
50060: , 
268, 
539
50070: , 
539
50080: , 
540
50080-50081: , 
544
50081: , 
540
50120-50135: , 
544
50200: , 
541
50200-50230: , 
544
50205: , 
541
50220-50240: , 
541
50250: , 
541, 
544
50300: , 
541
50320: , 
541, 
544
50323: , 
541
50325: , 
541
50327-50329: , 
541
50340: , 
542, 
544
50360: , 
541, 
544
50365: , 
541, 
544
50380: , 
541
50382-50389: , 
542
50382-50390: , 
544
50390: , 
542
50400: , 
542–543
50400-50540: , 
542–543
50405: , 
542–543
50432-50435: , 
544
50520: , 
543
50520-50526: , 
543
50525: , 
543
50526: , 
543
50541: , 
544
50541-50549: , 
544
50542: , 
541, 
544
50543: , 
541
50545-50547: , 
544
50545-50548: , 
541
50547: , 
541
50549: , 
544
50551-50561: , 
544
50551-50562: , 
544, 
546
50551-50580: , 
544
50555: , 
544
50570-50580: , 
539, 
544
50574: , 
544
50590: , 
539, 
540, 
544, 
552
50592: , 
544
50593: , 
541, 
544
50600: , 
545
50600-50630: , 
545
50600-50980: , 
545
50601-50630: , 
547
50605: , 
545
50610-50630: , 
545
50650: , 
545
50660: , 
545
50684: , 
546, 
547
50684-50695: , 
546
50686: , 
546
50700-50940: , 
546
50715: , 
547
50780-50800: , 
547
50815: , 
547
50820: , 
547
50840: , 
547
50860: , 
547
50940: , 
547
50945: , 
545
50945-50980: , 
547
50947: , 
546
50948: , 
546
50951: , 
546
50951-50961: , 
546
50951-50980: , 
546
50955: , 
546, 
547
50970: , 
546
50970-50980: , 
546
51102: , 
548
51500: , 
549
51520: , 
558
51520-51596: , 
549
51585: , 
273
51597: , 
549
51600: , 
633
51600-51610: , 
549, 
553
51701: , 
549, 
550
51702: , 
549
51703: , 
549
51720: , 
549
51725-51798: , 
213–214
51729: , 
213–214
51797: , 
213–214
51800-51980: , 
550
51840: , 
550
51841: , 
550
51900: , 
577
51990: , 
550
51992: , 
550
52000: , 
550, 
551
52000-52010: , 
550
52000-52700: , 
553
52005: , 
550
52007: , 
550, 
552
52201: , 
551
52204-52318: , 
549, 
551
52204-52355: , 
551
52214: , 
552
52224: , 
551–552
52234-52240: , 
551–552
52276: , 
552
52282: , 
563
52310: , 
552
52315: , 
552
52320: , 
552
52320-52344: , 
552
52320-52355: , 
551, 
552
52332: , 
552
52352-52355: , 
552
52353: , 
540
52400-52700: , 
552
52450: , 
552, 
563
52500: , 
552
52601: , 
563
52630: , 
563
52647: , 
563, 
564
52648: , 
563, 
564–565
53000-53899: , 
553
53020: , 
553
53025: , 
553
53060: , 
572
53200-53275: , 
586
53210: , 
553–554
53215: , 
553–554
53220: , 
553–554
53250: , 
554
53270: , 
553
53420: , 
554
53425: , 
554
53431-53442: , 
550
53444: , 
554
53446-53448: , 
554
53449: , 
554
53450: , 
554
53460: , 
554
53600-53665: , 
554
53850: , 
563
53852: , 
563
53855: , 
563
54000-54015: , 
555
54000-55899: , 
555
54015: , 
555
54050-54065: , 
556
54100: , 
556
54100-54164: , 
556
54105: , 
556
54110: , 
556
54110-54112: , 
556
54111: , 
556
54112: , 
556
54115: , 
557
54120: , 
556
54125: , 
556
54130: , 
556
54135: , 
556
54150: , 
556–557
54150-54161: , 
556–557
54160: , 
556–557
54161: , 
557
54200: , 
557
54200-54250: , 
557
54205: , 
557
54300-54440: , 
557
54304: , 
557
54380: , 
557
54400: , 
557
54400-54417: , 
557
54401: , 
557
54406: , 
557
54410: , 
557
54411: , 
557
54416: , 
557
54417: , 
557
54500: , 
558
54500-54535: , 
558, 
559
54505: , 
558, 
561
54512: , 
558
54520-54535: , 
558
54550: , 
558–559
54550-54560: , 
559
54560: , 
558–559
54640: , 
558–559
54640-54680: , 
559
54650: , 
558–559
54690-54692: , 
559
54692: , 
558–559
54700: , 
559, 
560
54800-54840: , 
560
54800-54861: , 
560
54840: , 
560
54865: , 
560
54900: , 
560
54901: , 
560
55000: , 
560
55040: , 
560
55041: , 
560
55060: , 
560
55100: , 
560
55175: , 
560
55180: , 
560
55200: , 
561
55250: , 
561
55300: , 
561
55400: , 
561
55500: , 
561–562
55500-55550: , 
562
55530: , 
561–562
55535: , 
561–562
55540: , 
561–562
55550: , 
561–562
55600: , 
562
55600-55680: , 
562
55605: , 
562
55650: , 
563
55680: , 
563
55700: , 
565
55705: , 
565
55706: , 
565
55720: , 
566
55725: , 
566
55801-55865: , 
564
55812: , 
565
55812-55815: , 
565
55842: , 
565
55842-55845: , 
565
55860: , 
566–567
55860-55865: , 
566–567
55862: , 
566–567
55865: , 
566–567
55866: , 
565
55875: , 
566
55920: , 
571
55970: , 
571
55980: , 
571
56405-56821: , 
572
56405-58999: , 
571
56605: , 
573
56606: , 
573
56620-56640: , 
573
56800-56810: , 
574
57000-57010: , 
575
57000-57426: , 
575
57020: , 
575
57061: , 
575
57065: , 
575
57100-57135: , 
575
57150-57180: , 
575–576
57155: , 
571
57200-57335: , 
576
57240: , 
577
57250: , 
577
57268: , 
577
57270: , 
577
57287-57289: , 
550
57289: , 
550
57330: , 
577
57400-57415: , 
577
57420-57426: , 
577
57421: , 
577
57452-57461: , 
578
57452-57800: , 
578
57460: , 
578
57461: , 
578
57700: , 
578
57720: , 
578
57800: , 
579
58100: , 
579
58100-58579: , 
579
58110: , 
579
58120: , 
579, 
588
58140: , 
580
58145: , 
580
58150: , 
373, 
571–572
58150-58240: , 
580
58150-58294: , 
580
58200: , 
261–262
58260: , 
580
58260-58294: , 
580
58290: , 
580
58300: , 
580
58300-58356: , 
580
58301: , 
580
58321-58323: , 
581
58340: , 
581
58345: , 
581
58346: , 
571
58350: , 
581
58541-58579: , 
581
58546: , 
580
58600-58770: , 
582
58611: , 
583, 
588
58660: , 
583
58660-58679: , 
548, 
583
58670: , 
583
58720: , 
373
58740: , 
583
58800-58960: , 
584
58950-58956: , 
584
58970: , 
584
58970-58976: , 
581
59000: , 
587
59000-59899: , 
585
59001: , 
587
59012: , 
587
59015: , 
641
59100: , 
588
59120-59150: , 
588
59160: , 
579, 
588
59200: , 
589
59400: , 
586, 
587t
59400-59622: , 
589
59409: , 
586, 
587, 
587t
59410: , 
587
59510: , 
586, 
587t
59514: , 
586
59610: , 
586
59612: , 
586
59618: , 
586
59620: , 
586
59812: , 
589
59812-59857: , 
589
59820-59821: , 
589
59830: , 
589
59840: , 
589
59840-59857: , 
590
59841: , 
589
59855-59857: , 
589
59857: , 
590
60000-60300: , 
595, 
596
60000-60699: , 
595
60210: , 
597
60212: , 
597
60220: , 
597
60225: , 
597
60240: , 
597
60252: , 
597
60254: , 
597
60270: , 
504
60300: , 
598
60500-60512: , 
595
60500-60699: , 
596
60520: , 
504
60520-60522: , 
595
60540-60545: , 
595
60600: , 
596–597
60605: , 
596–597
60650: , 
595
61000-61070: , 
600
61000-64999: , 
600
61020-61026: , 
600
61050: , 
600
61055: , 
600
61304-61576: , 
600
61312: , 
600
61330-61333: , 
615
61580: , 
601
61580-61598: , 
601
61580-61619: , 
600–601
61600: , 
601
61600-61616: , 
601
61613: , 
601
61615: , 
601
61616: , 
601
61618: , 
601
61619: , 
601
61680-61711: , 
601
62180-62258: , 
601–602
62223: , 
601–602
62263-63746: , 
602–603
62270: , 
256, 
604
62280: , 
605
62280-62282: , 
605
62281: , 
605
62282: , 
605
62320-62326: , 
605
62324: , 
605
62326: , 
605
62320-62327: , 
605
64400-64530: , 
605–606
64400-64999: , 
605
64448: , 
360
64490-64495: , 
606
64600-64647: , 
605
64612: , 
605
64680-64681: , 
605
64702-64727: , 
607
64721: , 
607
64831-64876: , 
607
64885-64911: , 
607
65091: , 
611–612
65091-65114: , 
611
65091-68899: , 
611
65093: , 
611–612
65101-65105: , 
611–612
65110-65114: , 
611–612
65125-65155: , 
613
65175: , 
613
65205: , 
613
65205-65265: , 
611
65220: , 
613
65222: , 
613
65286: , 
613
65400: , 
614
65710: , 
614
65710-65756: , 
614
65730-65755: , 
614
65800: , 
614
65800-65880: , 
614
65810-65815: , 
614
65820: , 
614
65850: , 
614–615
65860-65880: , 
614
65900-65930: , 
614
66020: , 
614
66020-66030: , 
614
66030: , 
614
66130: , 
614
66150: , 
614–615
66155: , 
614–615
66160: , 
614–615
66170: , 
614–615
66172: , 
614–615
66600: , 
615
66625: , 
615
66630: , 
615
66761: , 
615
66762: , 
615
66821: , 
614
66830-66990: , 
615
66983: , 
615
66984: , 
615
67141: , 
611
67145: , 
611
67311: , 
615
67312: , 
615
67314: , 
615
67316: , 
615
67331: , 
611
67400-67414: , 
615
67415: , 
615
67420-67450: , 
615
67550: , 
613
67560: , 
613
67800-67850: , 
392
67850: , 
611
67914-67917: , 
616
67921-67924: , 
616
67930: , 
611–612
67935: , 
611–612
68020: , 
616
68040: , 
616
68100-68135: , 
616
68320-68340: , 
616
68326-68328: , 
616
68400-68850: , 
616
68810: , 
616
68811: , 
616
69000: , 
618
69000-69979: , 
617
69005: , 
618
69020: , 
618
69100: , 
618
69105: , 
618
69110: , 
618
69120: , 
618
69121: , 
618
69140: , 
618
69200: , 
618
69205: , 
618
69209: , 
618
69210: , 
618
69300: , 
619
69310: , 
619
69320: , 
619
69420: , 
619
69421: , 
619
69424: , 
619
69433: , 
619
69436: , 
619
69501: , 
619
69502-69511: , 
619
69530: , 
619
69540: , 
619
69550-69554: , 
619
69601: , 
620
69604: , 
620
69631-69633: , 
620
69631-69646: , 
619
69632: , 
620
69633: , 
620
69637: , 
620
69641-69646: , 
620
69642: , 
620
69801: , 
620
69905: , 
620
69910: , 
620
69930: , 
620
69950: , 
621
69950-69979: , 
617
69955: , 
621
69960: , 
621
69970: , 
621
69990: , 
368, 
560, 
561, 
618, 
621
70010-76499: , 
635
70010-79999: , 
214
70390: , 
512–513
71010: , 
327
71015: , 
327
71020: , 
327
71030: , 
632, 
632t
72020-72295: , 
635
72192: , 
635t
72195: , 
635t
72198: , 
635t
73000-26: , 
259
74000: , 
634
74235: , 
517
74241: , 
634, 
638
74261: , 
528
74262: , 
528
74263: , 
529
74328: , 
518
74329: , 
518
74330: , 
518
74360: , 
516, 
517
74425: , 
546
74430: , 
553
74440: , 
561
74450: , 
553
74455: , 
553, 
633
74740: , 
581
74742: , 
581
75557-75574: , 
493
75600-75774: , 
493
75659: , 
490–491
75710: , 
492
75801-75807: , 
501
75809: , 
492
75810: , 
499
76000: , 
463, 
540
76001: , 
540
76506-76999: , 
638, 
639
76805: , 
638
76831: , 
581
76872: , 
567
76930: , 
461
76930-76999: , 
641
76941: , 
587
76942: , 
512–513, 
548
76945: , 
641
76946: , 
587
76948: , 
584
76965: , 
566
76975: , 
518
77002: , 
512–513, 
548
77003: , 
605
77012: , 
512–513, 
548, 
639
77021: , 
512–513
77063-77067: , 
638
77065: , 
638, 
638t
77066: , 
638, 
638t
77067: , 
638, 
638t
77261-77263: , 
642
77261-77799: , 
642
77263: , 
645
77280-77299: , 
642–643
77300: , 
645
77300-77370: , 
643
77336: , 
645
77371-77373: , 
644
77385-77387: , 
644–645
77399: , 
643
77401-77425: , 
644
77417: , 
645
77427: , 
645
77427-77499: , 
645
77520-77525: , 
646
77600-77615: , 
646
77620: , 
646
77750-77799: , 
646
77770-77772: , 
488
77778: , 
566–567
77799: , 
566–567
78012-78999: , 
648
78012-79999: , 
647
78452: , 
458–459
79005: , 
648
79005-79999: , 
648
79101: , 
648
79440: , 
648
79445: , 
648
80047-80081: , 
653
80047-89398: , 
214
80055: , 
653–654
80150-80299: , 
655
80305-80307:, 
654, 
655
80400: , 
656
80400-80439: , 
656
80500: , 
656
80502: , 
656
81000-81003: , 
658
81000-84999: , 
658
81161: , 
658
81200-81383: , 
658
81211: , 
658
81400-81479: , 
658
82533: , 
656
85002-85999: , 
659
85004-85049: , 
659
85025: , 
659
85027: , 
659
85060: , 
659
85097: , 
659
85610: , 
659–660
86000-86804: , 
661
86703-86703: , 
279
86850-86999: , 
661
86890: , 
661
87003-87999: , 
662
88000: , 
663
88000-88099: , 
663
88007: , 
663
88020: , 
663
88025: , 
663
88027: , 
663
88104-88199: , 
663
88172: , 
377
88173: , 
377
88177: , 
377
88300: , 
664
88300-88399: , 
664
88302: , 
264, 
664
88304: , 
664
88305: , 
499–500, 
664
88307: , 
664
88309: , 
664
88321-88334: , 
656–657
88329: , 
656–657
88331: , 
409, 
656–657
88332: , 
656–657
90281-90399: , 
671
90281-99607: , 
214, 
670
90375: , 
693–694
90460: , 
265, 
672, 
693–694
90460-90461: , 
672
90460-90474: , 
672
90461: , 
265, 
672, 
693–694
90471: , 
236, 
672, 
672b, 
673b, 
674, 
674t
90471-90474: , 
672, 
693–694
90472: , 
672, 
672b, 
673b, 
674t
90476-90749: , 
672, 
673
90633: , 
673
90657: , 
673, 
674t
90658: , 
673, 
674t
90700: , 
265
90707: , 
265
90714: , 
673b
90716: , 
672b
673
90732: , 
673, 
674t
90749: , 
672b, 
673, 
673b
90785-90899: , 
676
90791: , 
676
90792: , 
676
90832: , 
676
90832-90838: , 
676–677
90839: , 
676, 
677
90840: , 
677
90875-90876: , 
678
90901: , 
678
90911: , 
678
90935: , 
678, 
681
90935-90999: , 
678
90937: , 
678, 
681
90945: , 
678, 
681
90947: , 
678, 
681
90951: , 
679t
90951-90962: , 
679t
90951-90966: , 
680
90951-90970: , 
679t
90952: , 
679t
90953: , 
679t
90954: , 
679t
90955: , 
679t
90956: , 
679t
90957: , 
679t
90958: , 
679t
90959: , 
679t
90960: , 
679t
90961: , 
679t
90962: , 
679t
90963: , 
679t
90964: , 
679t
90966: , 
679t
90967: , 
679t
90967-90970: , 
680
90968: , 
679t
90969: , 
679t
90970: , 
679t, 
681
91010-91299: , 
681
92002: , 
269, 
683
92002-92014: , 
257
92002-92499: , 
682
92004: , 
683
92012: , 
683
92014: , 
269, 
683
92018: , 
683
92310: , 
671
92502-92700: , 
684
92511: , 
684
92920: , 
480, 
685
92920-92998: , 
479, 
685
92920-93799: , 
479
92921: , 
480, 
685
92928: , 
480
92929: , 
480
92974: , 
488
92975: , 
479
92978: , 
479–480
92979: , 
479–480
92986-92990: , 
481
93000: , 
458
93000-93010: , 
483
93000-93278: , 
685
93015: , 
458–459, 
484
93015-93018: , 
484
93016-93018: , 
484
93040-93278: , 
483
93268-93272: , 
484
93278: , 
458, 
483, 
484
93279-93285: , 
484
93279-93299: , 
484, 
490, 
685
93286: , 
484
93287: , 
484
93288-93292: , 
484
93293: , 
484
93294-93299: , 
484
93297: , 
484
93303-93355: , 
484, 
485, 
639, 
685
93355: , 
458
93451-93572: , 
486, 
685
93456: , 
486, 
487
93503: , 
351
93530-93533: , 
487
93531: , 
486
93561-93572: , 
487
93563: , 
486, 
487
93564: , 
486, 
487
93565-93568: , 
487
93567: , 
487
93600: , 
458, 
464
93600-93603: , 
489
93600-93662: , 
488
93602: , 
489
93603: , 
489
93609: , 
489
93610: , 
489
93612: , 
489
93613: , 
489
93619-93622: , 
489
93631: , 
489
93650: , 
489
93655: , 
489
93657: , 
489
93662: , 
458, 
464
93668: , 
489–490
93701-93790: , 
490
93784-93790: , 
490
93797-93799: , 
490
93880-93998: , 
639, 
686
94002: , 
326
94002-94799: , 
686–687
94999: , 
266
95004-95071: , 
688
95004-95199: , 
688
95076: , 
688
95079: , 
688
95115: , 
688, 
693–694
95117: , 
693–694
95120: , 
688
95250: , 
689
95251: , 
689
95782-96020: , 
689
95800-95811: , 
689
95803: , 
690
95905: , 
690
95905-95913: , 
690
95925: , 
604
95926: , 
604
95950: , 
601
96101: , 
676
96101-96127: , 
691
96150-96155: , 
692
96360: , 
692, 
695
96360-96361: , 
694
96361: , 
692, 
695
96365: , 
693, 
694
96365-96368: , 
671
96365-96379: , 
656, 
694
96366: , 
693, 
694
96367: , 
693, 
694
96368: , 
693, 
694
96369: , 
693
96369-96371: , 
693
96370: , 
693
96371: , 
693
96372: , 
671, 
693–694
96372-96376: , 
693–694
96373: , 
693–694
96374: , 
671, 
693–694
96375: , 
671, 
693–694, 
695
96376: , 
693–694
96401-96417: , 
694
96401-96549: , 
693–694
96413: , 
695
96415: , 
695
96420-96425: , 
694
96440: , 
694
96440-96549: , 
694
96446: , 
694
96450: , 
694
96521: , 
694
96522: , 
694
96549-96459: , 
696
96567: , 
696
96571: , 
696
96900: , 
697
96900-96999: , 
697
97010-97799: , 
697
97537: , 
698
97597: , 
385, 
698
97597-97610: , 
698
97598: , 
385, 
698
97602: , 
385
97605: , 
698
97606: , 
698
97750: , 
698
97761: , 
697
97802-97804: , 
699
98925-98929: , 
699
98940-98943: , 
700
98966-98968: , 
700
98966-98969: , 
335
98969: , 
700
99000-99091: , 
700
99024: , 
257, 
376, 
376t, 
700
99050: , 
700
99070: , 
375, 
376t, 
475, 
492, 
576, 
580, 
634, 
648, 
656, 
670–671, 
700
99100: , 
358t, 
360t
99100-99140: , 
355–358
99151-99153: , 
349
99151-99157: , 
213, 
349, 
701
99155-99157: , 
349
99170-99199: , 
701
99190-99192: , 
701
99201: , 
222, 
308, 
309
99201-99205: , 
284t, 
309
99201-99215: , 
338
99201-99350: , 
334
99201-99499: , 
214
99203: , 
228, 
307
99205: , 
304
99211: , 
311, 
674
99211-99215: , 
284t, 
311, 
319
99212: , 
303, 
331, 
332, 
376t
99213: , 
13
99214: , 
287, 
287b, 
307
99215: , 
314
99217: , 
284, 
313–314, 
329
99217-99226: , 
284t, 
313–314
99219: , 
314
99221: , 
315, 
338
99221-99223: , 
284t, 
314, 
676
99221-99239: , 
315
99222: , 
315
99224-99226: , 
284t, 
313, 
314
99231: , 
268, 
316
99231-99233: , 
316, 
319
99233: , 
268
99234-99236: , 
284t, 
313–314
99238: , 
317, 
336
99238-99239: , 
284t, 
329
99239: , 
317, 
318, 
336
99241-99245: , 
284t, 
319, 
320, 
676
99242: , 
320
99243: , 
320
99251-99255: , 
284t, 
309, 
319, 
320, 
324
99281-99288: , 
324
99283: , 
324
99285: , 
324, 
328
99288: , 
284t, 
324
99291: , 
325, 
326, 
326t
99291-99292: , 
284t
99292: , 
325, 
326, 
326t
99304-99306: , 
284t, 
328, 
329
99306: , 
328
99307-99310: , 
284t, 
328
99315: , 
328
99315-99316: , 
284t
99316: , 
328
99318: , 
284t, 
328
99324-99328: , 
284t
99324-99337: , 
284t, 
330
99339: , 
330
99339-99340: , 
284t
99340: , 
330
99341-99345: , 
284t
99341-99350: , 
330
99347-99350: , 
284t
99354: , 
332
99354-99357: , 
284t
99354-99360: , 
331
99355: , 
332
99358-99359: , 
284t
99360: , 
284t, 
332, 
333
99363: , 
333
99363-99364: , 
284t
99363-99368: , 
333
99364: , 
333
99366-99368: , 
284t, 
333
99374-99380: , 
284t, 
334
99381-99387: , 
284t
99381-99429: , 
334
99383: , 
265
99391-99397: , 
284t
99401-99429: , 
284t, 
335
99415-99416: , 
284t, 
331
99441-99443: , 
284t, 
335
99444–99449: , 
284t, 
335
99450-99456: , 
284t, 
335
99460: , 
336
99460-99463: , 
284t
99460-99465: , 
336
99461: , 
336
99462: , 
336
99463: , 
336
99464: , 
336
99464-99465: , 
284t
99465: , 
336
99466: , 
336–337
99466-99467: , 
284t
99466-99486: , 
336–337
99467: , 
336–337
99468-99476: , 
284t, 
337
99477-99480: , 
284t, 
337
99485: , 
336–337
99485-99486: , 
284t
99486: , 
336–337
99487: , 
338
99487-99490: , 
284t, 
338
99489: , 
338
99490: , 
284t, 
338
99495: , 
338
99495-99496: , 
284t, 
338
99496: , 
338
99497-99498: , 
284t, 
338
99499: , 
269, 
284t, 
338
99500-99602: , 
701
99601: , 
701
99605-99607: , 
701
ICD-10-CM codes
A00.0: , 
58, 
58b
A00-B99: , 
29, 
103
A01: , 
162
A01.4: , 
162
A02.21: , 
30
A03.0: , 
50
A07.1: , 
59t
A08.4: , 
710
A09: , 
84–85b
A27: , 
84
A27.8: , 
84
A27.81: , 
84
A27.9: , 
84t
A41.9: , 
105, 
106
A49.9: , 
89b, 
156, 
161
B00: , 
108
B00-B99: , 
108
B01: , 
108
B02: , 
108
B05: , 
108
B06: , 
108
B12: , 
74
B15: , 
108–109
B15-B19: , 
108–109
B20: , 
109, 
110, 
111, 
150, 
715
B37.0: , 
103b
B95: , 
88b, 
89b, 
161
B95.6: , 
89b, 
156, 
161
B95.61: , 
89b, 
104t, 
156, 
161
B95.61-B95.8: , 
161
B95.62: , 
104t
B95.6-B95.7: , 
161
B95.8: , 
89b, 
156, 
161
B95-B97: , 
103b, 
106
B96: , 
103b, 
148
B96.2: , 
55t
B96.20: , 
103, 
103t
B96.3: , 
148
B96.61: , 
156, 
161
B96.89: , 
89b, 
156, 
161
B99.9: , 
89b, 
148, 
156, 
161
C00-C96: , 
116
C00-D49: , 
29, 
40t, 
111, 
118, 
119
C16.4: , 
118, 
119
C25.9: , 
112
C50.919: , 
65, 
74
C50.929: , 
708
C50.C50: , 
501
C67.0: , 
118
C77.3: , 
74
C79.5: , 
120
C79.51: , 
120, 
120t
C80: , 
120
C80.0: , 
114, 
152
C80.1: , 
114, 
120
C80.2: , 
115
C81: , 
83b
C81.9: , 
83b
C81.90: , 
83b
C90: , 
115
D00-D09: , 
116
D10-D3A: , 
116
D37-D48: , 
116
D39.2: , 
174
D45: , 
74
D49: , 
116
D49.6: , 
73
D50-D64: , 
122
D50-D89: , 
29, 
121
D51.0: , 
74
D53.9: , 
123, 
123t
D61.1: , 
119
D61.82: , 
46
D63: , 
119, 
123
D63.0: , 
118
D63.0: , 
112, 
114–115, 
118, 
119, 
122
D63.8: , 
123
D64.9: , 
123t
D65-D69: , 
123
D72: , 
124
D77: , 
46
D78: , 
124
D80-D89: , 
124
D81: , 
85
D81.8: , 
85
D81.81: , 
85
D81.810: , 
84, 
85
E00-E89: , 
29, 
40t
E03.8: , 
41
E03.9: , 
56
E05.00: , 
69, 
714
E06: , 
91b
E06.0: , 
91b
E06.5: , 
91b
E08-E13: , 
124–126, 
177
E09.3: , 
136
E10: , 
126
E10.3: , 
89b, 
126, 
136
E10.31: , 
89b, 
126
E10.311: , 
126, 
126t
E10.319: , 
89b
E10.9: , 
89b
E11: , 
124, 
125, 
126, 
127t
E11.21: , 
29
E11.3: , 
136
E11.65: , 
152
E11.9: , 
66, 
71, 
75, 
89b, 
177
E13.3: , 
136
E53.8: , 
85
E85: , 
132
E85.4: , 
132, 
132t
E86: , 
87t
E86.0: , 
87, 
87t, 
118, 
152, 
710
F01: , 
129
F01-F99: , 
29, 
130
F01.5: , 
129
F01.50: , 
50
F02: , 
129
F02.8: , 
129
F02.80: , 
129
F03: , 
129
F10: , 
129
F10.14: , 
28
F11-F19: , 
129
F17: , 
146
F20-F29: , 
129–130
F30-F39: , 
129–130
F40-F99: , 
129–130
F45.41: , 
130
F45.42: , 
130
F70-F79: , 
181
F79: , 
181
G00: , 
132
G00-G99: , 
29, 
40t, 
132–134b, 
135b
G00.1: , 
132, 
132t
G24.4: , 
605
G24.5: , 
605
G51.3: , 
605
G30.0: , 
129
G31.83: , 
129
G63: , 
132, 
132t
G81: , 
135
G83: , 
135
G83.1: , 
135
G83.2: , 
135
G89: , 
130, 
132, 
132–134b, 
133, 
134–135, 
202
G89.0: , 
134–135
G89.1: , 
134–135
G89.11: , 
133
G89.18: , 
134, 
202, 
203
G89.2: , 
134–135
G89.28: , 
134, 
202, 
203
G89.3: , 
134–135, 
152
G89.4: , 
134
H00.01: , 
136
H00.02: , 
136
H00-H59: , 
29, 
136
H02.00: , 
137
H02.01: , 
137
H02.02: , 
137
H02.03: , 
137
H02.04: , 
137
H02.05: , 
137
H02.10: , 
137
H02.11: , 
137
H02.12: , 
137
H02.13: , 
137
H02.14: , 
137
H04: , 
138
H26.9: , 
75
H35.0: , 
141
H52.22: , 
98
H57.1: , 
134
H60-H95: , 
29, 
40t, 
138
H61.2: , 
139
H67: , 
139
H68-H69: , 
139
H70: , 
140
H80: , 
140
H80-H83: , 
140
H81: , 
140
H92.0: , 
134
H95: , 
138, 
140
I00-I99: , 
29, 
40t, 
140, 
141–142b, 
145b
I05.0: , 
709
I10: , 
67, 
69, 
71, 
75, 
142
I10-I15: , 
141, 
142
I11: , 
141, 
144
I12: , 
141, 
144
I12.0: , 
144t
I12.9: , 
144t, 
175
I13: , 
144
I15: , 
141, 
142
I20.0: , 
711
I21: , 
145, 
146
I21.01: , 
145, 
146
I21.0-I21.2: , 
145
I21.11: , 
145, 
146
I21.3: , 
145, 
146
I21.4: , 
145
I22: , 
145, 
146
I25.10: , 
71, 
75, 
709
I25.110: , 
28
I25.2: , 
145, 
146
I30: , 
91b
I30.9: , 
91b
I31: , 
91b
I31.9: , 
91b
I48.2: , 
75
I50: , 
141, 
144
I50.9: , 
71
I51.4-I51.9: , 
141
I60.9: , 
84
I60-I69: , 
141
I63: , 
83b
I63.2: , 
83b
I63.21: , 
83b
I63.219: , 
83b
I63.9: , 
83b
I65.0: , 
83b
I74.9: , 
83
I85.00: , 
50
J00-J99: , 
29, 
147
J01: , 
148
J01.0: , 
148
J01.00: , 
148
J01.90: , 
148
J02: , 
93b
J02.0: , 
93b
J09.X2: , 
715
J15: , 
148
J15.0: , 
148, 
148t
J18.9: , 
65, 
73, 
86b, 
87t, 
185
J32.9: , 
148
J35: , 
44
J35.01: , 
57
J40: , 
714
J45.20: , 
71
J96.1: , 
60
K00-K95: , 
29
K14.6: , 
134, 
135
K21.9: , 
517, 
711
K22.0: , 
50
K22.8: , 
517
K25: , 
85, 
155
K25.0: , 
155
K25.4: , 
76
K25.9: , 
85, 
86
K35.80: , 
184–185
K40.90: , 
57, 
75
K52.9: , 
83b
K56.7: , 
43
K57: , 
154
K57.2: , 
154
K57.20: , 
154t
K57.21: , 
154, 
154t
K57.32: , 
154t
K57.92: , 
154t
K59.00: , 
56
K63.5: , 
526–527
K70.30: , 
87t
K70.31: , 
87t
K74: , 
87t
K74.6: , 
87t
K74.60: , 
87t
K80: , 
92t
K80.0: , 
92t
K80.00: , 
92t
K80.10: , 
92t
K80.20: , 
92t
K81.9: , 
92t
K85.9: , 
90
K86.1: , 
90
K92.2: , 
76, 
154
L00-L08: , 
156
L00-L99: , 
29, 
155–156
L03: , 
156
L03.0: , 
156
L03.01: , 
156
L03.011: , 
156
L03.2: , 
89b
L03.211: , 
89b
L03.90: , 
89b
L50.0: , 
55t
L97: , 
157
M00: , 
160, 
161
M00.0: , 
161
M00.00: , 
161
M00.03: , 
161
M00.031: , 
161
M00-M02: , 
160
M00-M99: , 
29, 
40t, 
160, 
163, 
163–164
M01: , 
160, 
162, 
162b
M01.X1: , 
162
M01.X11: , 
162
M02: , 
160, 
162, 
162b
M02.2: , 
162
M02.20: , 
162
M02.21: , 
162
M02.212: , 
162
M12.9: , 
162
M16: , 
159
M19.90: , 
161, 
162
M25.5: , 
134
M25.51: , 
134
M32.9: , 
71
M48.4: , 
85
M48.40: , 
85
M48.40XA: , 
85t
M54: , 
134
M54.0: , 
135
M54.2: , 
133
M54.5: , 
134
M70.84: , 
97
M79.2: , 
132t
M79.6: , 
134
M80: , 
160, 
163, 
164, 
190
M80.0: , 
164
M80.00: , 
164, 
190
M80.07: , 
164
M80.071: , 
164
M80.8: , 
190
M80.80: , 
164, 
190
M80.82: , 
190
M80.821: , 
190
M80.821A: , 
190
M81: , 
160, 
163–164
M81.0: , 
164
M81.8: , 
190
M84.40: , 
164
M84.47: , 
190
M84.48: , 
712
M84.5: , 
115
M87: , 
160
N00-N39: , 
165
N00-N99: , 
29, 
40t, 
165
N10: , 
55t
N18: , 
141, 
144
N18.1: , 
144t, 
175
N18.2: , 
144t, 
165
N18.3: , 
144t, 
165
N18.4: , 
144t, 
165
N18.5: , 
144t
N18.6: , 
144t, 
165
N18.9: , 
144t
N20: , 
165
N20.0: , 
165
N39.0: , 
103, 
103t
N40-N53: , 
165
N60-N65: , 
165
N70-N98: , 
165
O00: , 
174
O00-O9A: , 
154–155, 
169, 
170–171, 
175
O01: , 
174
O08: , 
174
O09: , 
76, 
170
O09.291: , 
170
O10: , 
175
O10.211: , 
175
O13: , 
141, 
142
O14: , 
141, 
142
O23.42: , 
77
O24: , 
177, 
177b
O24.4: , 
177
O26.851: , 
32
O26.851-O26.859: , 
32, 
33
O26.852: , 
32
O26.853: , 
32
O26.859: , 
32
O35: , 
176, 
176b
O36: , 
176
O80: , 
173–174
O86.0: , 
106, 
107, 
107b
O90.3: , 
173
O98.7: , 
109, 
111
O99.81: , 
177
O9A.1: , 
114
P00-P04: , 
67
P00-P96: , 
29, 
40t, 
179
Q00-Q99: , 
29, 
179, 
180
Q80-Q89: , 
155–156
Q90.0: , 
181
Q90.9: , 
181
Q91.1: , 
181–182
Q91.5: , 
181–182
Q92.1: , 
181–182
Q93.1: , 
181–182
Q96.3: , 
181–182
Q96.4: , 
181–182
Q97.2: , 
181–182
Q98.0-Q98.1: , 
181–182
Q98.4: , 
181–182
Q98.7: , 
181–182
Q99.2: , 
181–182
R00-R99: , 
29, 
58, 
183–184
R03.0: , 
141, 
142
R04.2: , 
59t
R05: , 
70, 
714
R06.00: , 
69
R07.0: , 
134
R07.1-R07.9: , 
134
R07.89: , 
67
R07.9: , 
120, 
714
R10.2: , 
134
R10.31: , 
184–185
R13.10: , 
517
R17: , 
69, 
70
R18: , 
87t
R18.8: , 
87t
R29.6: , 
184
R40.2: , 
184
R40.24: , 
184
R50.9: , 
70, 
714t
R51: , 
134
R52: , 
134–135
R53.2: , 
184
R53.83: , 
56, 
69
R58: , 
84
R63.0: , 
70
R63.5: , 
56
R65: , 
107
R65.1: , 
107
R65.10: , 
184
R65.11: , 
184
R65.2: , 
105, 
106, 
107
R65.20: , 
107
R65.21: , 
33, 
105
R75: , 
109, 
110
R91.1: , 
59t
R93: , 
185
R93.2: , 
185
R99: , 
184
S00.01XS: , 
94
S00-S99: , 
187
S00-T14.9: , 
188
S00-T88: , 
29, 
186, 
187, 
188, 
199
S02: , 
189
S04: , 
188
S06.336: , 
28
S06.360A: , 
50
S12: , 
189
S15: , 
188
S22: , 
189
S32: , 
189
S42: , 
189, 
709
S42.301A: , 
709
S43: , 
47
S43.50: , 
47
S43.50XA: , 
47
S49: , 
189
S50.351: , 
28
S52: , 
189
S59: , 
189
S62: , 
189
S72: , 
189, 
190
S72.00: , 
190t
S72.001: , 
190
S72.001A: , 
95
S72.001S: , 
95
S79: , 
189
S81.0: , 
200, 
201
S81.00: , 
200
S81.001: , 
200
S81.001A: , 
200
S81.01: , 
200
S81.011: , 
200
S81.011A: , 
200
S81.019: , 
200
S81.03: , 
201
S81.031: , 
201
S81.031A: , 
201
S81.039: , 
201
S81: , 
200, 
201
S82: , 
189
S89: , 
189
S92: , 
189
T07: , 
187, 
188
T20-T25: , 
191–192, 
193
T20-T28: , 
192
T18.1: , 
517
T21.43: , 
193
T21.44: , 
193
T21.53: , 
193
T21.6: , 
193–194
T21.63: , 
193
T21.63XA: , 
193, 
194
T26-T28: , 
191–192, 
193
T30: , 
192
T30.4: , 
193
T31: , 
192
T32: , 
192
T36.0X5: , 
195
T36.6X6A: , 
33
T36-T50: , 
195, 
196, 
197
T36-T65: , 
195, 
196
T38.3X1: , 
125, 
127t
T38.3X6: , 
125, 
127t
T45.1X5: , 
113, 
118
T45.1X5A: , 
118, 
119
T49.7: , 
197
T51-T65: , 
193, 
196
T54.2X1A: , 
193, 
194
T74: , 
199, 
200
T76: , 
199, 
199–200b, 
200
T80.2: , 
106, 
107
T81.12: , 
105, 
107
T81.31XA: , 
188
T81.4: , 
106, 
107, 
107b
T84.50XA: , 
187
T85.6: , 
125, 
127t
T86: , 
115, 
202, 
203
T86.1: , 
202
T86.2: , 
60
T88.0: , 
107
T88.9: , 
58b
V00-Y99: , 
29
X92-Y08: , 
199
Y07: , 
199
Y07.01: , 
199
Y63.6-Y63.9: , 
196
Y84.2: , 
113, 
118
Y90: , 
129
Y92: , 
194
Y92.015: , 
194
Y92.53: , 
27
Y92.530: , 
27
Y93: , 
28
Y93.4: , 
28
Y93.41: , 
28
Y93.42: , 
28
Y93.43: , 
28
Y93.44: , 
28
Y93.45: , 
28
Y93.H9: , 
194
Z00-Z99: , 
29, 
58–60, 
58b
Z01.81: , 
74
Z01.810: , 
74, 
75
Z01.811: , 
74
Z01.812: , 
74
Z01.818: , 
74, 
75
Z01.83: , 
73
Z01.89: , 
72, 
73
Z02.6: , 
55t
Z03: , 
67
Z03.810: , 
67
Z04: , 
67
Z04.41: , 
199
Z04.42: , 
199, 
200
Z04.71: , 
199
Z04.72: , 
199
Z11.0: , 
59t
Z11.4: , 
109, 
111
Z12.11: , 
526–527
Z14: , 
60–62t
Z15: , 
60–62t
Z16: , 
104, 
104b, 
60–61t
Z17: , 
60–62t
Z18: , 
60–62t
Z20: , 
59–60
Z20.6: , 
109
Z21: , 
60–62t, 
109, 
110, 
111
Z22: , 
60–62t
Z23: , 
60, 
673, 
674
Z28.3: , 
60–62t
Z31.5: , 
60–62t
Z33.1: , 
60–62t, 
154, 
172
Z34: , 
76, 
170
Z34.00: , 
77, 
170
Z37: , 
171
Z37.0: , 
171, 
174
Z38: , 
179, 
180, 
181
Z38.00: , 
65t, 
181
Z38.01: , 
181
Z38.1: , 
179
Z38.2: , 
181
Z39.0: , 
173
Z51: , 
65, 
112, 
117, 
119
Z51.0: , 
113, 
117
Z51.1: , 
65
Z51.11: , 
65, 
65t, 
74, 
113–115, 
117
Z51.12: , 
113–115, 
117, 
118
Z52.4: , 
64
Z53.09: , 
57
Z55: , 
64
Z55.4: , 
64
Z57.31: , 
146
Z66: , 
60–62t
Z67: , 
60–62t
Z68: , 
60–62t
Z71.7: , 
110, 
111
Z72.0: , 
146
Z72.51: , 
109t
Z72.52: , 
109t
Z72.53: , 
109t
Z74.01: , 
60–62t
Z76.81: , 
55t
Z76.82: , 
60–62t
Z77: , 
60
Z77.22: , 
146, 
147
Z78: , 
60–62t
Z78.1: , 
60–62t
Z79: , 
60–62t
Z79.4: , 
125, 
126, 
177
Z80-Z87: , 
71, 
717
Z80.0: , 
527
Z83.71: , 
527
Z85: , 
113, 
115
Z85.3: , 
59t, 
152
Z85.6: , 
115
Z85.038: , 
527
Z85.048: , 
527
Z85.79: , 
115
Z86.010: , 
527
Z87.310: , 
163–164
Z87.891: , 
146
Z88: , 
60–62t, 
65
Z88.0: , 
65, 
65t
Z89: , 
60–62t
Z89-Z90: , 
60–62t
Z90: , 
60–62t
Z91.0: , 
60–62t
Z91.013: , 
55t
Z91.12: , 
196, 
197
Z91.13: , 
196, 
197
Z91.81: , 
184
Z92.82: , 
60–62t, 
60–62t, 
146
Z93: , 
60–62t
Z93-Z99: , 
60–62t
Z94: , 
60–62t
Z94.1: , 
60
Z95: , 
60–62t, 
71
Z95.5: , 
75
Z96: , 
60–62t
Z97: , 
60–62t
Z98: , 
60–62t
Z98.85: , 
60–62t
Z99: , 
60–62t
Z99.11: , 
60
Z99.2: , 
144t, 
165
Hcpcs codes
A4550: , 
375
A4561: , 
576
A4580-A4590: , 
431
A4641: , 
492, 
633
A4649: , 
238
A4918: , 
240
A9500: , 
458–459
E0571: , 
241
E0572: , 
241
E0607: , 
239
E1399: , 
238
G0008: , 
236, 
674t
G0009: , 
673, 
674t
G0010: , 
674
G0104: , 
527
G0105: , 
527
G0106: , 
527
G0120: , 
527
G0121: , 
527
G0122: , 
527
G0127: , 
392
G0168: , 
397
G0270: , 
222
G0271: , 
222
G0328: , 
527
G0402: , 
236
J0153: , 
458–459
J0585: , 
517
J1100: , 
695
J1200: , 
695
J2270: , 
694
J2469: , 
695
J7300: , 
580
J7306: , 
395
J7307: , 
395
J9310: , 
695
K0178-K0179: , 
241
K0180: , 
241
L0984: , 
700
L3702-L3766: , 
698
L8000-L8039: , 
698
P9010: , 
661
P9021: , 
661
S4989: , 
580
T1016: , 
237
T1017: , 
237
V2500-V2599: , 
670–671
Index
References are to pages. Pages followed by “b” indicate boxes; “f, ” figures;
“t, ’” tables.
A
A codes, 
104f
Abbe-Estlander flap, 
509, 
510f
Abdomen, 
533
Ablation,
intracardiac procedures, 
489
of kidney lesion, 
541
Abortion services, 
585, 
589–590
Abscess,
nasal, 
440–441, 
441f
soft tissue, 
423
Abuse of persons, 
199
Accurate coding, 
82
Actinotherapy, 
697
Activity codes, 
28b
Acute conditions, 
90
Adenoidectomy, 
514–515
Adenoids, 
514–515
Adrenal glands, 
595f, 
596
Adult abuse and neglect, 
199
Advance Care Planning, 
338
Affordable Care Act, 
22
AIDS., 
 
See
 
HIV infection
Allergen immunotherapy, 
688
Allergy immunology, 
688–689
Allergy to seafood, 
55t
Allergy testing, 
688
Allogenic bone marrow, 
499–500
Allografts, 
400
Alphabetic Index, 
82
Ambulatory surgery, 
27b, 
76b
Amniocentesis, 
587
Amyloidosis, rheumatoid neuritis with, 
132b
Anal fissure, 
530, 
530f
Anal fistula, 
529, 
530f
Analgesia, 
347
patient-controlled, 
348, 
349f
Anastomoses, 
522, 
522f
Anatomic pathology, 
663
“and, ”, 
44
Anemia, 
118, 
119b, 
122–123, 
122f
chemotherapy-related, 
118, 
119b
of chronic disease, 
123b
chronic simple, 
123b
immunotherapy-related, 
118, 
119b
malignancy-related, 
118
radiotherapy-related, 
118, 
119b
Anesthesia, 
347
ASA’s 
Relative Value Guide
, 
352–354, 
353f
basic unit value, 
353, 
354f
CMS’s base units, 
353–354, 
354f
concurrent care modifiers, 
361–362
conscious sedation, 
349–350
conversion calculations/factors, 
359–360
for infant less than 4 kg, 
273
medical records, 
356f, 
357f
moderate sedation, 
349–350
modifying units, 
355–360
multiple procedures, 
360
payment formula, 
351–360
physical status modifiers, 
358–359, 
359f
pre-anesthetic examination, 
364
qualifying circumstances, 
355–358, 
358f
return to operating room, 
364
surgeon, anesthesia by, 
260
time, 
354–355
types of, 
347–350
unlisted procedure code, 
362
unusual anesthesia, 
256
Anesthesia section, of the CPT manual,
codes and modifiers., 
 
See
 
Anesthesia
format of, 
350–351, 
350f
Aneurysms,
brain, 
601
cardiovascular repairs, 
474
Angiography, 
637, 
637f
Angioplasty,
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty,
467, 
468f
report, 
480f
transluminal, 
474
Angioscopy, 
474
Ankyloglossia, 
511, 
511f
Anoscopy, 
530, 
530f
Antepartum services., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
Anticoagulant management, 
333
Anus, 
529–531
Aorta,
radiology coding, 
493
repair of, 
465–466
Aphakia, 
614
Appendectomy, 
524
Appendix, 
524
Approximate, Flag 0, 
30
Approximate, Flag 1, 
31–33, 
31f
Arteries, 
470f
coronary., 
 
See
 
Coronary artery
radiology coding, 
493
Arthritic joint, due to 
Salmonella paratyphi
, 
162b
Arthritic wrist, staphylococcal, 
161b
Arthrocentesis, 
425, 
425f, 
425b
Arthrodesis, 
429
Arthropathies, infectious, 
160–162
M00 code, 
161
M01 code, 
162
M02 code, 
162
Arthroscopy, 
432–433
Artificial insemination, 
581
Artificial urinary sphincter, 
554
ASA’s 
Relative Value Guide
, 
352–354, 
353f
Ascites due to cirrhosis of the liver, 
87b
Asthma, chronic, 
71
Atherectomy, transluminal, 
474
Attending physician, 
317
Auditory system, 
139f, 
617, 
617f
external ear conditions, 
139
external ear procedures, 
618–619
format of subsection, 
617
inner ear conditions, 
140
inner ear procedures, 
620
mastoid conditions, 
139–140
middle ear conditions, 
139–140
middle ear procedures, 
619–620
middle fossa approach, 
621
operating microscope, 
618–621, 
621f
temporal bone, 
621
Autografts, 
400, 
400f, 
401f
Autologous bone marrow, 
499–500
Autonomic nervous system, 
605–607
B
Bacterial infection as cause of disease classified elsewhere, 
103t
Bariatric surgery, 
520, 
520f
Baroreceptor system, 
596f
Basket forceps, 
433b
B codes, 
108, 
108f
Bedsores, 
404–405, 
405f
Behavioral disorders, 
128–130
Behavior assessment/intervention, 
692
Behavior change intervention, 
335
Benign prostatic hyperplasia, 
563
Biliary tract, 
532
Biofeedback, 
678
Biometry, 
626.
  
See also
 
Radiology
Biopsies,
bone marrow, 
499–500
breasts, 
410
cervical, 
577, 
578
corpus uteri, 
579
fine needle, 
377, 
377f
laryngoscopic, 
514
liver, 
531
lung or mediastinum, percutaneous needle, 
450
nose, skin outside of, 
441
pancreas, 
532
percutaneous, 
424
prostate, 
565–566
sentinel node, 
501b, 
503
sinus tract injection procedure codes, 
424
skin lesions, 
388–389, 
409
breast procedures, 
410–411
vagina, 
577
Biotinidase deficiency, 
84–85
Birth control,
abortion services., 
 
See
 
Abortion services
implantable capsules, 
395
intrauterine devices, 
580, 
581f
Bladder, 
538f, 
548–552, 
548f
cystourethroscopy, 
550
endoscopy, 
550–551
excision, 
549
incision, 
548
injection procedures, 
549
laparoscopy, 
550
removal of, 
548
repair procedures, 
550
transurethral resection of tumor, 
551–552
transurethral surgery, 
551–552
urodynamics, 
550
vesical neck and prostate codes, 
552
Bladder cancer, instillation procedure, 
549
Bladder cuff, 
545
Bleeding., 
 
See
 
Hemorrhage
Blepharoplasty, 
403–404
Blood and blood-forming organs, diseases of, 
121–124, 
121f
Blood coagulation tests, 
659–661
Blood patch, 
347
Blood pressure,
ambulatory monitoring, 
490
diastolic, 
222
elevated., 
 
See
 
Hypertension
systolic, 
222
Boarding home services, 
330
Bold type, 
41
Bone cancer, metastatic, 
120b
Bone grafts, 
428
Bone marrow aspiration, 
499–500
Bone marrow biopsy, 
499–500
Bone marrow harvesting, 
499–500
Bone marrow transplants, 
499–500
Bottle type repair, 
560
BPH treatment procedures, 
563
Brachiocephalic vascular family, 
471f
Brachytherapy,
clinical, 
646–647, 
647f
intracoronary, 
487–488
for prostate cancer, 
566–567
Brackets [ ], 
43
Brain, 
599
aneurysm, 
601
arteriovenous malformation, 
601
vascular disease, 
601
Branchial cleft cyst, 
514
Breasts/breast cancer,
biopsies, 
410
chemotherapy, 
65b
mammography, 
638
mastectomies, 
410–411, 
411f
personal history of, 
59t
Bronchi., 
 
See
 
Trachea and bronchi
Bronchoplasty, 
449
Bronchoscopy, 
439
Bulbourethral gland, 
554
Bundle of His recording, 
489
Burns, 
191–193, 
405–407
classification of, 
406, 
406f
Lund-Browder chart/classification, 
406f
Rule of Nines, 
406f
treatment of, 
406, 
406f, 
407
Bypass surgery,
cardiovascular bypass grafting materials, 
475
coronary artery bypass, 
466–468, 
467f, 
468f
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 
520, 
520f
C
Canalplasty, 
619
Cancer,
bladder cancer, instillation procedure, 
549
bone cancer, metastatic, 
120b
breast cancer., 
 
See
 
Breasts/breast cancer
chemotherapy., 
 
See
 
Chemotherapy
colorectal cancer screening, 
526–527b
Hodgkin lymphoma, 
83
nuclear medicine, 
647–648
prostate., 
 
See
 
Prostate cancer
radiation oncology., 
 
See
 
Radiation oncology
skin lesions, excision of, 
391, 
391f
Candidiasis infection of mouth, 
103
Cardiac catheterization, 
486–487, 
685–686, 
686f
catheter insertion, 
475–476, 
476f
catheter placement, 
471–472
Cardiac device evaluations, 
484
Cardiac tumor, 
461–462
Cardiac valves, 
465–466
Cardiography, 
481–484
Cardiologists, 
457
Cardiovascular system, 
457–459
angioplasty., 
 
See
 
Angioplasty
bypass., 
 
See
 
Bypass surgery
coding of services, 
457
medicine codes, 
below
,
radiology codes, 
below
,
surgery codes, 
below
,
electrocardiograms., 
 
See
 
Electrocardiograms
electrophysiology, 
458
intracardiac procedures, 
488–489
hypertension., 
 
See
 
Hypertension
invasive cardiology, 
457
medicine codes, 
457f, 
479–490
blood pressure monitoring, ambulatory, 
490
cardiac catheterization, 
486–487, 
685–686, 
686f
cardiography, 
481–484
echocardiography, 
484–485, 
485f, 
686
intracardiac electrophysiologic procedures, 
488–
489
intracoronary stent placement, 
480, 
480f
intravascular ultrasound, 
479–480
noninvasive physiologic studies, 
490
noninvasive vascular diagnostic services, 
686
other procedures, 
490
peripheral arterial disease rehabilitation, 
489–490
stress tests, 
481, 
481f
therapeutic services, 
479–481, 
685
thrombolysis, 
479
valvuloplasty, 
481
myocardial infarction., 
 
See
 
Myocardial infarction
noninvasive services, 
458
nuclear cardiology, 
458–459
preoperative evaluations, 
75b
radiology codes, 
457f, 
490–492
aorta and arteries, 
493
contrast material, 
492
heart coding, 
493
interpretation, 
491
professional component, 
490–491
supervision, 
491
technical component, 
490–491
surgery codes, 
457f, 
459–476
aneurysm repair, 
474
angioscopy, 
474
arteries, 
469
bypass grafting, 
475
cardiac tumor, 
461–462
cardiac valves, 
465
catheter placement, 
471–472
coronary artery anomalies, 
466
coronary artery bypass, 
466–468, 
467f, 
468f
electrophysiologic operative procedures, 
465
embolectomy, 
473, 
473f
endovascular aneurysm repair, 
474
extracorporeal life support services, 
469
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation services,
469
fistula repair, 
474, 
474f
pacemaker/cardioverter-defibrillator, 
462–464
patient-activated event recorder, 
465
pericardiocentesis, 
461, 
461f
pericardium, 
461
thrombectomy, 
473
transluminal angioplasty, 
474
transluminal atherectomy, 
474
transmyocardial revascularization, 
462
vascular access, 
475
vascular injection procedures, 
475–476, 
477f, 
478f
vein repairs, 
474
veins, 
469
Cardioverter-defibrillators, 
462–464
Care management services, 
338
Care plan oversight services, 
334
Carotid body, 
595f, 
596–597, 
596f
Carpal tunnel release, 
607, 
607f
Case management services, 
333
Casts,
codes, 
430–431
removal of, 
430
Cataracts, removal of, 
615
Catheterization,
cardiac., 
 
See
 
Cardiac catheterization
corpus uteri, 
581
Swan-Ganz catheter, 
351, 
352f
thrombolysis, 
479
ureteral, 
549
urethral, 
554
CAT scanning, 
635, 
636f
Cellular mosaicism, 
181
Cellulitis,
face, staphylococcal, 
89b
finger, staphylococcal, 
156b
Central nervous system, 
598-599.
  
See also
 
Spine and spinal cord
assessments/tests, 
691
Cerclage, nonobstetric, 
578
Cerebrospinal fluid shunts, 
601–602, 
602f
Certificates of medical necessity,
oxygen necessity, 
247f
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, 
246f
Cervical conization, 
578, 
579f
Cervicoplasty, 
403–404
Cervix uteri, 
572f, 
578–579
biopsy of, 
578
dilation of, 
579
endoscopy, 
578
excision, 
578
repair, 
578
Chalazion, 
136
Chapters in ICD-10-CM manual, 
39–41
categories, 
41
format of, 
40–41
sections, 
40
subcategories, 
41
subclassifications, 
41
Character 6, 
28, 
84b
Character 7, 
31, 
32f, 
47, 
84b
Cheiloplasty, 
509
Chemical peels, 
403, 
403f
Chemistry, 
658
Chemotherapy, 
65b, 
694–695
for breast cancer, 
65b
Chest pain, noncardiac, 
67b
Chest tube, 
451
Chief complaint, 
55, 
290
Child abuse and neglect, 
199
Childbirth., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
Chiropractic manipulative treatment, 
700
Choice List field, 
33–34, 
34f
Cholecystitis with cholelithiasis, acute, 
92b
Cholecystostomy, 
532
Choledochotomy, 
532
Cholesteatoma, 
620
Chordee, 
557
Chromosomal abnormalities, 
179–182
Chromotubation, 
581
Chronic care management services, 
338
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), 
165
Chronic pain syndrome, 
134
Ciliary body, 
615
Circulatory system diseases, 
140–146
Circumcision, 
556–557
Cirrhosis of the liver, ascites due to, 
87b
Cisternal puncture, 
600
Claim forms,
CMS-1500, 
209f
skin lesions, treatment of, 
389, 
389f
Cleft palate, 
510, 
510f
Clinical Documentation Improvement (CDI) specialists, 
730
Clinical findings, not elsewhere classified, 
182–185
Clinical immunology, 
688–689
Clitoroplasty, 
574, 
575f
CMS Documentation Guidelines, 
340–342
CMT, 
700
CNS., 
 
See
 
Central nervous system
Coagulation defects, 
123, 
123f
Coagulation tests, 
659–661
Cochlear device implant, 
620, 
620f
“Code also” note, 
46, 
47f
“Code first” note, 
46, 
46f
“Code first underlying disease” note, 
46, 
47f
Colitis, infectious, 
84
Colon, diverticulitis with hemorrhage, 
154b
Colonoscopy, 
525–528
diagnostic, 
525
injection, 
528
measurements, 
525f
multiple procedures, 
528
virtual, 
528, 
528f
Colons, 
44
Colorectal cancer screening, 
526–527b
Colpocentesis, 
575
Colporrhaphy, 
576–577
Colpotomy, 
575
Coma scales, 
184
Combination coding, 
28, 
103, 
183
with symptoms, 
183
Combination Flag 3, 
33, 
33f
Complex chronic care management services, 
338
Comprehensive examination, 
296
Computed tomography, 
635, 
636f
Computer-assisted surgical navigation, 
428
Congenital anomalies, 
179–182
Congestive heart failure, with benign hypertension, 
71
Conization of the cervix, 
578, 
579f
Conjunctiva, 
616
Connective tissue diseases, 
159–163
Conscious sedation, 
349–350
Consultant, 
318
Consultation services, 
318–320
clinical pathology, 
656–657
initial inpatient consultations, 
320
office/outpatient consultations, 
319
request for, 
318
Contraceptives., 
 
See
 
Birth control
Conventions, 
42–44
Coordination of care, 
306
Cordocentesis, 
587
Cornea, 
614
Coronary artery anomalies, 
466
Coronary artery bypass, 
466–468, 
467f, 
468f
Coronary artery disease (coexisting conditions), 
71
Corpus uteri, 
572f, 
579–582
excision, 
579–580
hysteroscopy, 
581–582, 
582f
introduction codes, 
580
laparoscopy, 
581–582, 
582f
Corrosion, 
191–193
Counseling, 
306
behavior change intervention, 
335
risk factor reduction, 
335
Cowper’s gland, 
554
CPT manual,
abbreviations, 
216
add-on codes, 
211, 
212f
anesthesia section of,
codes and modifiers., 
 
See
 
Anesthesia
format of, 
350–351, 
350f
Appendix A, 
211
Appendix B, 
211, 
212f
Appendix C, 
211, 
212f.
  
See also
 
E/M codes
Appendix D, 
211
Appendix E, 
212
Appendix F, 
212–213
Appendix G, 
213
Appendix H, 
213
Appendix I, 
213
Appendix J, 
213
Appendix K, 
213
Appendix L, 
213
Appendix M, 
213
Appendix N, 
213–214
assistant surgeon, 
276
minimum, 
277
when qualified resident surgeon not available, 
277
bilateral procedures, 
260–261
categories, 
216
categories and subcategories, 
216, 
216f
Category I codes, 
223
Category II codes, 
221–223
Category III codes, 
223–224
changed code symbol, 
211f
changed text symbols, 
211f
code format, 
217–218
decision for surgery, 
269
discontinued procedure, 
267
distinct procedural service, 
271
CMS modifiers (-X), 
271
E/M section of,
code assignment in., 
 
See
 
E/M codes
contents of, 
284
levels of E/M service., 
 
See
 
E/M services
format of, 
210–224
Guidelines, 
216, 
216f
increased procedural services, 
255–256
indented codes, 
217
Index, 
224–228
locating terms, 
224
multiple codes, 
225
range of codes, 
225–228
“See” cross-references, 
48
single code, 
224
infants less than 4 kg, procedure performed on,
273
integumentary system subsection, 
382
format of, 
382
laboratory platform testing, alternative, 
279
laboratory section of., 
 
See
 
Pathology/laboratory
section, of the CPT manual
mandated services, 
260
mastectomies, 
268b
medicine section of, 
670.
  
See also
 
Medicine codes
format of, 
670–671
modifiers, 
212, 
213f, 
219, 
220f, 
254–279
anesthesia section of manual., 
 
See
 
Anesthesia
CMS modifiers (-X), 
271
multiple modifiers, 
279
multiple procedures, 
261–263
multiple modifiers, 
279
multiple procedures,
CPT modifiers, 
261–263
multiple operation(s), same operative session, 
262
procedure performed multiple times, 
263
same operation, different site, 
262
outside laboratory, 
278
pathology section of., 
 
See
 
Pathology/laboratory
section, of the CPT manual
postoperative management only, 
268–269
postoperative period,
return to the operating room during, 
275
unrelated procedure or service by the same
physician during, 
276
preoperative management only, 
269
preventive services, 
260
professional component, 
258–259
purpose of, 
208
radiology section of,
format of, 
625
generally., 
 
See
 
Radiology
reduced services, 
265
reference laboratory, 
278
repeat clinical diagnostic laboratory test, 
279
repeat procedure,
by another physician, 
274
by same physician, 
274
resequenced codes, 
213–214, 
214f
resequencing, 
213–214
respiratory section of, 
438
revisions, 
208–210
sections, 
214–216, 
216f
. 
See also specific topics
throughout this index
service by the same physician during the
postoperative period, 
270
service by the same physician on same day of
other service, 
257–258
significant separately identifiable E/M service, by
the same physician or other qualified health
care professional on the same day of the
procedure or other service, 
257–258
special reports, 
224
specific notes, 
216f
staged or related procedure, 
270
stand-alone codes, 
217
subcategories, 
216
subheadings, 
216f
subsections, 
215, 
216f
surgeon, anesthesia by, 
260
surgery section of., 
 
See
 
Surgery section, of the
CPT manual
surgical care only, 
268
surgical team, 
273
symbols used, 
211–214
two surgeons, 
273
unlisted procedures, 
220–221, 
221f
unrelated evaluation and management service, by
the same physician during a postoperative
period, 
257
unusual anesthesia, 
256
updating, 
208–210
Craniectomy, 
600
Craniotomy, 
600
Cricothyroid tracheostomy, 
448, 
448f
Critical care services, 
325–326
inpatient neonatal and pediatric critical care
services, 
337
pediatric critical care patient transport, 
336–337
Cryoablation, 
489
Cryptorchidism, 
558–559
CT scanning, 
635, 
636f
Current Procedural Terminology., 
 
See
 
CPT manual
Custodial care services, 
330
Cystectomy, 
549
Cystolithotomy, 
548
Cystotomy, 
548
Cystourethroscopy, 
550
Cysts,
branchial cleft, 
514
pilonidal, 
394
renal, 
542
urachal, 
549
Cytogenic studies, 
663
Cytopathology, 
663
D
Death NOS, 
184
Decision making., 
 
See
 
Medical decision making
Decubitus ulcers, 
404–405, 
405f
Default codes, 
47
Dehydration due to pneumonia, 
87b
Delayed graft, 
401
Delivery, 
585.
  
See also
 
Maternity care and delivery
Dementia, 
129
Dentoalveolar structures, 
512
Dermabrasion, 
403, 
403f
Dermatology,
Medicare surgical modifiers, 
16
special procedures, 
697
Detailed examination, 
295
Diabetes/diabetes mellitus, 
29, 
124–127, 
126f, 
127f, 
177
chronic, 
71
in pregnancy, 
177
retinopathy, as cause of, 
89b, 
126b
Type 1 diabetes, 
126f, 
177
with ophthalmic complications, 
89b
Type 2 diabetes, 
127f, 
177
Diabetic retinopathy, with type I diabetes, 
89b, 
126b
Diagnosis-related groups., 
 
See
 
Medicare program
Dialysis, 
678–681, 
679t
Diaphragm, 
504
Digestive system, 
154–155, 
508f
abdomen, 
533
adenoids, 
514–515
anus, 
529–531
appendix, 
524
biliary tract, 
532
diseases of, 
154–155, 
154f
esophagus, 
516–519
format of subsection, 
508
intestines, 
521–522
lips, 
509–510
liver, 
531
Meckel’s diverticulum, 
523
mouth., 
 
See
 
Mouth
omentum, 
533
pancreas, 
532
peritoneum, 
533
pharynx, 
514–515
rectum, 
524–528
endoscopic procedures, 
524–528
stomach, 
520
tongue, 
510–512
tonsils, 
514–515
uvula, 
512
Digital block, 
421, 
421f
Dilation and curettage, 
579, 
590
Dilation and evacuation, 
590
Diphtheria vaccine, 
673b
Direct face-to-face time, 
307
Dislocations, 
190b, 
422–430, 
421f
Displacement therapy, 
442–443
Diverticulitis of the colon, with hemorrhage, 
154b
Documentation Guidelines, 
340–342
Documentation improvement specialists, 
730
Domiciliary care services, 
330
Doppler ultrasound, 
641
Dosimetry, 
643
Down syndrome, 
181b
DRGs., 
 
See
 
Medicare program
Drug assays, 
654–655
therapeutic, 
655
Drugs, 
195–197, 
198f
HCPCS table of, 
243–245, 
244f
Medicare prescription drugs, 
7
medicine codes., 
 
See
 
Medicine codes
National Codes,
routes of administration of drugs, 
244–245, 
245f
table of drugs, 
243–245, 
244f
routes of administration, 
244–245, 
245f
table of drugs, 
243–245, 
244f
Dual cuff, 
554
Durable Medical Equipment (DME), 
3–4
jurisdictions, 
3f, 
4f
National Codes, 
236, 
245–248
Dysuria, flank pain with, 
165b
E
Ear., 
 
See also
 
Auditory system
diseases of, 
138–140
external ear, 
139, 
618–619
inner ear, 
140, 
620
mastoid, 
139–140
mastoid process, diseases of, 
138–140
middle ear, 
139–140, 
619–620
Earwax removal, 
618
Echocardiography, 
484–485, 
485f, 
686
E. coli
 infection, 
55t
urinary tract infection due to, 
103
Ectopic pregnancy, 
174, 
588, 
588f
Ectropion, 
137, 
138f, 
616, 
616f
Eczema, 
384
Educational maladjustment, 
64b
Electrical stimulation of the musculoskeletal system, 
428
Electrocardiograms, 
481, 
482f
signal-averaged electrocardiography, 
483
telephonic transmission, 
484
Electromyographic studies, 
691
Electronic medical records, 
9
Electrophysiologic operative procedures, 
465
Electrophysiology, 
458
intracardiac procedures, 
488–489
Embolectomy, 
473, 
473f
Embolus, 
473
E/M codes,
Advance Care Planning, 
338
anticoagulant management, 
333
care management services, 
338
care plan oversight services, 
334
case management services, 
333
choosing the correct code, 
306
chronic care management services, 
338
complex chronic care management services, 
338
consultation services., 
 
See
 
Consultation services
custodial care services, 
330
Documentation Guidelines, 
340–342.
  
See also
 
E/M
services
domiciliary care services, 
330
emergency department services, 
324
example, 
308–309, 
309f
home care plan oversight services, 
330
home services, 
330
hospital inpatient services., 
 
See
 
Hospital inpatient
services
hospital observation services., 
 
See
 
Hospital
observation services
medical records documentation, 
286
medical team conferences, 
333
newborn care., 
 
See
 
Newborns
non–face-to-face physician services, 
335
nursing facility services., 
 
See
 
Nursing facilities
office/outpatient services., 
 
See
 
Office/outpatient
services
online medical evaluations, 
335
other services, 
338
patient status, 
285
place of service, 
284–285
practice with, 
338
preventive medicine services, 
334–335
prolonged physician services, 
331–333
rest home services, 
330
special services, 
335
standby services, 
332–333
telephone services, 
335
transitional care management services, 
338
type of service, 
285
using, 
309–338
Emergency department services, 
324
Emesis, flank pain with, 
165b
E/M section, of the CPT manual,
code assignment in., 
 
See
 
E/M codes
contents of, 
284
levels of E/M service., 
 
See
 
E/M services
E/M services,
audit form, 
287, 
288f
coding., 
 
See
 
E/M codes
contributing factors, 
306–307
coordination of care, 
306
counseling, 
306
Documentation Guidelines, 
340–342
key components, 
287
levels of, 
287–307
medical decision making., 
 
See
 
Medical decision
making
medical examination., 
 
See
 
Examination
medical records., 
 
See
 
Medical records
office, new patient, 
287–306, 
309
patient history., 
 
See
 
History
presenting problem, nature of, 
307
Endocardial resection, 
489
Endocrine glands, 
597
Endocrine system, 
595–598, 
595f
diseases/disorders of, 
124–127, 
125f
glucose monitoring, 
689
Endocrinology, 
689
Endometrial sampling, 
579
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, 
518
Endoscopy,
bladder, 
550–551
cervix uteri, 
578
esophageal, 
516, 
521f
kidney, 
544
mediastinum, 
504
Medicare, 
16
musculoskeletal system, 
432–433
rectal, 
524–528
respiratory system, 
438, 
439–440
ureter, 
546–547
vagina, 
577
Endotracheal anesthesia, 
347, 
348f
Endotracheal intubation, 
446–447, 
447f
Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR), 
474
End-stage renal disease, 
680–681
Entropion, 
137, 
138f, 
616, 
616f
Enucleation, 
611–612
Epididymis, 
559–560
Epididymovasostomy, 
560
Epidural anesthesia, 
347
Epidural blood patch (EBP), 
347
EPOs, 
22
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, 
518
Esophagus, 
516–519
endoscopy of, 
516, 
521f
laparoscopy of, 
519, 
519f
ESWL, 
539–540, 
540f
Ethmoidal arteries, ligation of, 
444, 
444f
Evaluation and Management section (of the CPT manual),
code assignment in., 
 
See
 
E/M codes
contents of, 
284
levels of E/M service., 
 
See
 
E/M services
Evisceration, 
611–612
Evocative/suppression testing, 
656
Examination, 
295
elements of, 
296f
general multi-system, 
341f, 
342f
levels of, 
295
pre-anesthetic, 
364
Excludes1 note, 
45, 
45f
Excludes2 note, 
45, 
45f
Excludes notes, 
45
Exclusive Provider Organizations (EPOs), 
22
Exenteration, 
611–612
Exocrine glands, 
597
Exostosis, 
618
Expanded problem focused examination, 
295
Extracapsular cataract extraction, 
615
Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy, 
539–540, 
540f
Extracranial nerves, 
605–607
Eye and ocular adnexa, 
136–138, 
137f, 
611, 
612f
anterior chamber, 
614
anterior sclera, 
614–615
anterior segment, 
614–616
chalazion, 
136
ciliary body, 
615
conjunctiva, 
616
cornea, 
614
extraocular muscles, 
615
eyeball., 
 
See
 
Eyeball
eyelids, 
612f, 
616
format of subsection, 
611–616
hordeolum, 
136
iris, 
615
lacrimal apparatus, 
612f
lacrimal sac, 
612f
lens, 
615
orbit, 
615
Eyeball, 
611–613
foreign bodies, removal of, 
613
implants, 
613, 
613f
laceration repair, 
613
removal of, 
611–612, 
613
Eyelids, 
137f, 
612f, 
616
ectropion., 
 
See
 
Ectropion
entropion., 
 
See
 
Entropion
F
Fallopian tubes., 
 
See
 
Oviduct/ovary
Falls, repeated, 
184
Family history, 
292
Fascia lata grafts, 
427–428
Fatigue, jaundice and, 
69
Federal Register
, 
10, 
11f
Female genital system, 
571–584, 
572f
cervix uteri., 
 
See
 
Cervix uteri
corpus uteri., 
 
See
 
Corpus uteri
format of subsection, 
571–572
in vitro fertilization, 
584
intersex surgery, 
571
ovary., 
 
See
 
Oviduct/ovary
oviduct., 
 
See
 
Oviduct/ovary
perineum., 
 
See
 
Vulva, perineum, and introitus
Skene’s glands, 
553, 
572
vagina., 
 
See
 
Vagina
vulva., 
 
See
 
Vulva, perineum, and introitus
Fetuses,
abortion services., 
 
See
 
Abortion services
conditions complicating, 
176
congenital anomalies, 
179–182
perinatal guidelines, 
178–179
ultrasound showing twins, 
639f
Fibrosis of liver, 
87b
Fine needle biopsies, 
377, 
377f
Fingernails, 
392–395
First-listed diagnoses, 
67
chronic diseases, 
71
diagnostic services, 
72
documented conditions, 
71
prenatal conditions, 
76b, 
179
preoperative evaluations, 
74–75
therapeutic services, 
73
uncertain diagnoses, 
69
Fistula repair, 
474, 
474f
Five-character code, 
84
Flags, 
30–34
Flank pain, 
165b
Flaps,
Abbe-Estlander, 
509, 
510f
free osteocutaneous, 
428
lingual frenum, 
511
rotation flaps, 
398, 
399f
skin grafts, 
401–402
Fluoroscopy, 
626.
  
See also
 
Radiology
Foot repairs, 
429–430
Forceps, basket, 
433b
Four-character code, 
84
Fractures, 
417–419
casts., 
 
See
 
Casts
closed treatment, 
417–418
with manipulation, 
418
without manipulation, 
418
dislocation and, 
190b
hip fracture with dislocation, 
190b
manipulation, 
418
nasal., 
 
See
 
Nasal fractures
open treatment, 
417–418
pathologic, 
163, 
190, 
190b
percutaneous skeletal fixation, 
419, 
420f
repair, 
431, 
438
right humerus, 
190b
splints., 
 
See
 
Splints
spontaneous, 
163
strapping., 
 
See
 
Strapping
traction, 
419, 
420f
traumatic, 
189, 
191f
types of, 
417f
vertebrae, 
85
Fraud., 
 
See
 
Medicare fraud and abuse
Free osteocutaneous flaps, 
428
Frenotomy, 
511
F-wave studies, 
690
G
Gallstone, ultrasound showing, 
639f
Gastric ulcers, 
86b
Gastroenterology, 
681
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 
155b
GEMs mapping files, 
30, 
30f
General anesthesia, 
347, 
349
General Equivalence Mappings (GEMs), 
30–34, 
30f
Genitourinary system,
diseases of, 
165
female genitals., 
 
See
 
Female genital system
male genitals., 
 
See
 
Male genital system
urinary system., 
 
See
 
Urinary system
Giardiasis, 
59t
Glasgow coma scale, 
184
Global radiology service, 
491
Global surgery period, 
374–375
Glossary, 00043,
Glucose monitoring, 
689
Goniotomy, 
614
Grafts,
bone, 
428
cardiovascular bypass grafting materials, 
475
complications from, 
203
coronary artery bypass, 
467, 
467f
pain from, 
203
skin., 
 
See
 
Skin grafts
Graves’ disease, hypertension and, 
69
Group Practice Model (GPM), 
22
Gunshot wounds, 
423
H
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS), 
233–239,
233b
code groupings, 
234–239
format of the HCPCS manual, 
239–248
Level I codes, 
233.
  
See also
 
CPT manual
Level II codes. National Codes, 
below
,
Level III codes (Local Codes), 
234
levels of, 
233–234
National Codes, 
233–239
alphanumeric listing, 
240
colorectal cancer screening, 
526–527b
durable medical equipment, 
236, 
245–248
G codes, 
236
general rules, 
241
index, 
239–240, 
240f
K codes, 
236
Medicare Advanced Beneficiary Notice of
Noncoverage (ABN), 
242, 
243f
miscellaneous codes, 
238–239
modifiers, 
241–242
national physician fee schedule, 
248–249, 
248f
professional services, 
236–239
Q codes, 
237
routes of administration of drugs, 
244–245, 
245f
S codes, 
237
table of drugs, 
243–245, 
244f
T codes, 
237–238
temporary procedure, 
236–239
updating the HCPCS manual, 
239
Health Insurance Claim Form, 
30f
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 
7–10,
233b
code sets, 
8–9
electronic transactions, 
8, 
8b
National Provider Identification, 
9–10
privacy requirements, 
9
security requirements, 
9
Health Maintenance Organizations, 
21–22
Heart., 
 
See also
 
Cardiovascular system
aorta., 
 
See
 
Aorta
coding of services, 
460, 
465
external view, 
460f
great vessels, repair of, 
465
hypertensive heart disease, 
141–142, 
144b
internal view, 
460f
radiology coding, 
493
Heart valves, 
465
Hematology, 
659–661
Hemic and lymphatic systems, 
498–503, 
498f
bone marrow procedures, 
499–500
diaphragm, 
504
format of subsection, 
498
laparoscopy, 
499
lymph nodes and lymphatic channels, 
500–503
mediastinum, 
503–504
biopsy, 
450
spleen, 
499
Hemodialysis, 
474f, 
678, 
680f
Haemophilus influenzae, 
acute maxillary sinusitis due to, 
148b
Hemorrhage, 
123, 
154–155
diverticulitis of the colon with, 
154b
gastrointestinal, 
155b
nasal hemorrhage control., 
 
See
 
Nose
subarachnoid, 
84
Hemorrhoids, 
531, 
531f
Hepatitis,
Hepatitis A, 
108
Hepatitis B, 
108
Hepatitis C, 
108
Hepatitis D, 
109
Hepatitis E, 
109
viral, 
108–109
Hernia repairs, 
533
HIPAA., 
 
See
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA)
Hip fracture with dislocation, 
190b
History, 
289
chief complaint, 
55, 
290
elements of, 
289–293, 
294f
family history, 
292
levels of, 
293
past history, 
292
of present illness, 
290
review of systems, 
291–292
social history, 
292
HIV infection, 
109–110
in pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium, 
111
HMOs, 
21–22
Hodgkin lymphoma, 
83
Holter monitor, 
481, 
482f
Holter report, 
483f
Home care plan oversight services, 
330
Home health procedures/services, 
701
Home services, 
330
Hordeolum, 
136
Hormone pellet implantation, subcutaneous, 
395
Hospital inpatient services, 
315–318
admission services, 
317–318
attending physician, 
317
critical care services., 
 
See
 
Critical care services
discharge services, 
317–318
emergency department services, 
324
initial hospital care, 
315
inpatient coding., 
 
See
 
Inpatient coding and
reporting
pediatric critical care., 
 
See
 
Pediatric critical care
subsequent hospital care, 
316–317
Hospital observation services, 
313–314
initial observation care, 
313–314
observation care discharge services, 
313
subsequent observation care, 
314
Human immunodeficiency virus., 
 
See
 
HIV infection
Humerus fracture, 
190b
Hydatidiform mole, 
174, 
175f, 
588f
Hydration services, 
692–694
Hypertension, 
141–142, 
143f
benign hypertension, 
142
coexisting conditions, 
71
controlled, 
141, 
142
essential, 
142
and Graves’ disease, 
69
heart disease and, 
141
malignant, 
142
in pregnancy, 
175
renal disease and, 
141–142
secondary, 
141
transient, 
141, 
142
uncontrolled, 
142
unspecified, 
142
Hypertensive cerebrovascular disease, 
141
Hypertensive chronic kidney disease, 
141–142, 
144b
Hypertensive heart disease, 
141–142, 
144b
Hypertensive renal disease, 
141, 
144b
Hypertensive retinopathy, 
141
Hyperthermia, 
646
Hypospadias, 
557
Hysterectomies, 
580
Hysterosalpingography, 
581
Hysteroscopy, 
581–582, 
582f
Hysterotomy, 
588, 
590
I
ICD-9-CM manual, replacement of, 
27.
  
See also
 
ICD-10-CM manual
ICD-10-CM manual, 
26
. 
See also specific anomalies, diseases, and disorders
A codes, 
104, 
104f
Approximate, Flag 0, 
30
Approximate, Flag 1, 
31–33, 
31f
arthropathies, infectious, 
160–162
MO0 code, 
161
MO1 code, 
162
MO2 code, 
162
B codes, 
108, 
108f
bold type, 
41
chapters, 
39–41
categories, 
41
format of, 
40–41
sections, 
40
subcategories, 
41
subclassifications, 
41
character 6, 
28, 
84b
character 7, 
31, 
32f, 
47, 
84b
Choice List field, 
33–34, 
34f
clinical findings, not elsewhere classified, 
182–185
“Code also” note, 
46, 
47f
“Code first” note, 
46, 
46f
“Code first underlying disease” note, 
46, 
47f
combination coding, 
28, 
103, 
183
with symptoms, 
183
Combination Flag 3, 
33, 
33f
default codes, 
47
development of, 
26
Excludes1 note, 
45, 
45f
Excludes2 note, 
45, 
45f
Excludes notes, 
45
external causes, consequences of, 
186–203, 
186f
first-listed diagnoses, 
67
chronic diseases, 
71
diagnostic services, 
72
documented conditions, 
71
prenatal conditions, 
76b, 
179
preoperative evaluations, 
74–75
therapeutic services, 
73
uncertain diagnoses, 
69
flags, 
30–34
format of, 
35
GEMs mapping files, 
30, 
30f
General Equivalence Mappings (GEMs), 
30–34,
30f
Health Insurance Claim Form, 
36f
ICD-9-CM manual, replacement of, 
27
improvements in, 
27–29
Includes notes, 
44, 
45f
index, 
35–38, 
37f
inpatient coding and reporting., 
 
See
 
Inpatient
coding and reporting
instructional notations in, 
42–48
“and, ”, 
44
brackets [ ], 
43
colons, 
44
conventions, 
42–44
NEC, 
43
nonessential modifiers, 
43
NOS, 
43
parentheses ( ), 
43
“with, ”, 
44
italicized type, 
41
laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified, 
182–
185
laterality in coding, 
31, 
97–98
locating codes in, 
82
mapping, 
30–34
mnemonic device for remembering classifications
in, 
40t
multiple coding, 
103
No Map, 
33
Official Guidelines., 
 
See
 
Official Guidelines for
Coding and Reporting (ICD-10-CM manual)
outpatient coding and reporting., 
 
See
 
Outpatient
coding and reporting
placeholder x, 
44f, 
47
Scenario field, 
33–34, 
34f
structure of, 
29
subclassifications, fourth- and fifth-digit, 
28
Tabular List, 
39–41
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting, 
82
“Use additional code” note, 
46
Z codes, 
58–66, 
119
assignment of, 
64–65
External Cause Index, 
62–63, 
63f
“history of” disease, 
66, 
119
index locations, 
63
status codes, 
60
ICD-10-PCS manual,
characters of, 
720–721
changing characters, 
721, 
721f
character 1, 
720
character 2, 
721
character 3, 
721–722
Tabular List, 
723–730, 
724f
development of, 
719–721
index, 
723, 
723f
root operations (medical and surgical), 
722, 
725–
728t, 
728–730t
comparison of, 
725–728t, 
728–730t
definitions, 
725–728t, 
728–730t
Tabular List, 
723–730, 
724f
Ill-defined conditions, 
182–185
inpatient coding and reporting, 
708
Immune globulins, 
671–672
Immunity disorders, 
121–124
human immunodeficiency virus., 
 
See
 
HIV
infection
Immunizations, 
671–674
Immunology codes, 
661
Implants,
cardioverter-defibrillators, 
462–464
cochlear devices, 
620, 
620f
complications from, 
203
contraceptive capsules, 
395
eyeball, 
613, 
613f
hormone pellet implantation, subcutaneous, 
395
musculoskeletal system, 
427–428
pacemakers, 
462–464
pain from, 
203
penile, 
557
Incarcerated hernia, 
533
Incentive spirometry, 
686–687, 
687f
Includes notes, 
44, 
45f
Index, 
35–38, 
37f
Indicator dilution studies, 
487
Individual Practice Associations (IPAs), 
22
Infants., 
 
See
 
Newborns
Infectious and parasitic diseases, 
103–110
A codes, 
104, 
104f
bacterial infection as cause of disease classified
elsewhere, 
103t
B codes, 
108, 
108f
combination coding, 
103
hepatitis, viral, 
108–109
HIV infection, 
109–110
multiple coding, 
103
resistant infections, 
104
sepsis, 
105–106
septic shock, 
105–106
sequelae of, 
95, 
95f
severe sepsis, 
105–106
Influenza immunizations, 
236b, 
674t
Infusion services, 
693–694
home infusion procedures services, 
701
Ingrown toenail, 
393
removal of, 
393f
Injection services, 
693–694
biopsy codes, 
424
bladder procedures, 
549
cardiovascular vascular injection procedures, 
475–
476, 
477f, 
478f
nasal turbinate injections, 
442–443, 
443f
pneumothorax injection, 
452
sinus tract injection procedure codes, 
424
Injury coding, 
28, 
186–203, 
186f
Inner ear procedures, 
620
Inpatient coding and reporting,
abnormal findings, 
718b
additional diagnoses, 
716–718
comparative or contrasting conditions, 
711
complications, 
713
ill-defined conditions, 
708
interrelated conditions, 
709
multiple diagnoses, 
710
observation unit admissions, 
715b
original treatment plan not carried out, 
712
outpatient coding, distinguished, 
706–707
outpatient surgery admissions, 
716b
Present on Admission (POA), 
719
principal diagnosis, 
706, 
707–711
sequencing of, 
706
signs, 
708
symptoms, 
708
uncertain diagnoses, 
714–715, 
719b
Inpatient services,
coding and reporting., 
 
See
 
Inpatient coding and
reporting
hospital., 
 
See
 
Hospital inpatient services
neonatal and pediatric critical care services, 
336–
337
Insemination, artificial, 
581
Instructional notations in ICD-10-CM manual, 
42–48
“and, ”, 
44
brackets [ ], 
43
colons, 
44
conventions, 
42–44
NEC, 
43
nonessential modifiers, 
43
NOS, 
43
parentheses ( ), 
43
“with, ”, 
44
Insulin pump, 
126, 
127f
Integumentary system,
CPT manual subsection, 
382
format of, 
382
skin., 
 
See
 
Skin, subcutaneous, and accessory
structures
subcutaneous structures., 
 
See
 
Skin, subcutaneous,
and accessory structures
Intensity-modulated radiation treatment, 
644–645
Intermediate care facility, 
327
International Classification of Diseases
,
Clinical Modification (10th revision)., 
 
See
 
ICD-10-
CM manual
Procedure Coding System., 
 
See
 
ICD-10-PCS
manual
Intersex surgery, 
571
Interstitial fluid pressure, 
428
Intestines, 
521–522
Intracapsular cataract extraction, 
615
Intracoronary stent placement, 
480, 
480f
Intrauterine devices, 
580, 
581f
Intravascular ultrasound, 
479–480
Introitus., 
 
See
 
Vulva, perineum, and introitus
In vitro fertilization, 
581, 
584
IPAs, 
22
Iris, 
615
Ischemia,
coronary arteries, 
466
reversible, 
647–648
Island pedicle flap, 
402
Italicized type, 
41
IUDs, 
580, 
581f
J
Jaundice,
diagnostic studies, 
70
and fatigue, 
69
K
Keratoplasty, 
614
Kidneys, 
538–544, 
538f
abscess, 
539
chronic kidney disease, 
165
donors, 
64b
endoscopy, 
544
end-stage renal disease, 
680–681
excision, 
541
hypertensive chronic kidney disease, 
141–142,
144b
hypertensive renal disease, 
141, 
144b
incision, 
538–540
index locations, 
544
introduction codes, 
542
laparoscopy, 
544
renal transplantation, 
202, 
541–542
repair, 
542–543
structure of, 
543f
Kidney stone, 
165b
Klebsiella pneumoniae
, 
148b
Knee orthosis, 
236b
Knife wounds, 
423
L
Labia majora, 
574f
Labia minora, 
574f
Laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified, 
182–185
Laboratory section., 
 
See
 
Pathology/laboratory section, of the CPT
manual
Labyrinth, 
620
Labyrinthectomy, 
620
Labyrinthotomy, 
620
Lacerations., 
 
See
 
Wound(s)
Lacrimal apparatus, 
612f
Lacrimal sac, 
612f
Lacrimal system, 
137f, 
138
Laminectomy, 
603, 
604f
Laparoscopic retropubic prostatectomy (LRP), 
565
Laparoscopy,
bladder, 
550
corpus uteri, 
581–582, 
582f
esophagus, 
519, 
519f
hemic and lymphatic systems, 
499
kidney, 
544
oviduct/ovary, 
583
spermatic cord, 
561–562
testis, 
558–559
ureter, 
546
Laryngoplasty for a laryngeal web, 
447
Laryngoscopy,
biopsies, 
514
direct, 
439, 
440
indirect, 
440
Laryngotomy, 
446
Larynx, 
446–447
excision, 
446
introduction codes, 
446–447
intubation, 
446–447
laryngoplasty for a laryngeal web, 
447
repair, 
446–447
Laser coagulation of the prostate, 
564
Laser transmyocardial revascularization, 
462
Laser vaporization of the prostate, 
564–565
Late effects codes, 
94–95
Laterality in coding, 
31, 
97–98
Leptospirosis, aseptic meningitis in, 
84
Lesions,
kidney, ablation of, 
541, 
541f
nasal lesions, excision or destruction of, 
442
penile lesions, destruction of, 
556
skin., 
 
See
 
Skin lesions
Ligature strangulation, 
389
Limited lymphadenectomy, 
500
Lingual frenum, 
511
Lipectomy, 
404
Lips, 
509–510
reconstruction, 
509
repair, 
509
Liver, 
531
abnormal scan, 
185b
biopsy, 
531
cirrhosis of, 
87b
fibrosis of, 
87b
transplant, 
531
Local anesthesia, 
347, 
348f
Locating codes in manual, 
82
Long-term care facility, 
328
Lumbar puncture, 
604, 
604f
Lund-Browder chart/classification of burns, 
406f
Lungs and pleura, 
449–452
excision, 
450
fluid withdrawal from, 
450
incision, 
450
pneumonolysis, 
452
pneumothorax injection, 
452
removal, 
439, 
450–451
thoracoplasty, 
450
Lymphadenectomies, 
500
Lymphangiogram, 
501
Lymphatic system., 
 
See
 
Hemic and lymphatic systems
Lymphoma, 
83
Lysis of adhesions, 
583
M
Magnetic resonance angiography, 
635
Magnetic resonance imaging, 
626, 
635, 
636f.
  
See also
 
Radiology
cardiac MRIs, 
493, 
493f
Magnifying loupes, 
621, 
621f
Male genital system, 
555–567, 
555f
epididymis, 
559–560
format of subsection, 
555
intersex surgery, 
571
penis., 
 
See
 
Penis
prostate., 
 
See
 
Prostate
scrotum, 
560
seminal vesicles, 
562–563
spermatic cord, 
561–562
testis, 
558–559
tunica vaginalis, 
560
vas deferens, 
561
Malignancies., 
 
See
 
Cancer
Maltreatment of persons, 
199
Mammography, 
638
Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), 
21
Managed health care, 
20–22
Manometric studies, 
546
Mapping, 
30–34, 
489
Mastectomies, 
268b, 
410–411, 
411f
Mastoid process, diseases of, 
138–140
Maternity care and delivery, 
585–586
abortion services., 
 
See
 
Abortion services
antepartum services, 
585, 
587–590
amniocentesis, 
587
cordocentesis, 
587
excision, 
588
introduction codes, 
588–589
repair services, 
589
estimated date of delivery, 
585
first-listed diagnosis, 
170–171
format of subsection, 
585
HIV-infected persons, 
111
normal delivery, 
173–174
postpartum care, 
585–586
postpartum period, 
173
routine obstetric care, 
586–587
Maxillary artery, ligation of, 
444, 
444f
MCOs, 
21
Meckel’s diverticulum, 
523
Mediastinum, 
503–504
biopsy, 
450
Medical care complications, 
202–203
Medical decision making, 
299–300
complexity levels, 
300–306
complications or death, risk of, 
301–306
data to be reviewed, 
300–301
elements of, 
302f
examples, 
301, 
303b, 
304b
Medical examination., 
 
See
 
Examination
Medically Unlikely Units, 
634–635
Medical necessity, certificates of,
oxygen necessity, 
247f
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, 
246f
Medical records,
anesthesia, 
356f, 
357f
documentation, 
286
Guidelines, 
340–342
1995 Guidelines., 
 
See also
 
E/M services
electronic records, 
9
management options, 
300
patient history., 
 
See
 
History
risk of complications or death, 
301–306
Medical team conferences, 
333
Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs), 
3f, 
4f, 
5
Medicare Advanced Beneficiary Notice of Noncoverage (ABN), 
243f
Medicare Advantage, 
6, 
22
Medicare fraud and abuse, 
17–20
form of fraud, 
18
protecting yourself from, 
20
regulations, 
19–20
violators, 
18
what constitutes, 
17–19
who determines, 
18–19
Medicare program, 
2–7
abuse., 
 
See
 
Medicare fraud and abuse
accepting assignment, 
5
anal procedures, 
530b
anesthesia service time, 
355b
CMS’s mission to serve beneficiaries, 
3b
coinsurance payments, 
4–5
colonoscopies, 
526b
dentoalveolar structures, 
512
DRGs. Inpatient diagnosis-related groups, 
below
,
E/M services, 
211, 
256, 
261, 
266, 
269, 
274, 
340
Federal Register
, 
10, 
11f
fraud., 
 
See
 
Medicare fraud and abuse
hospital insurance, 
5–6
immunization codes, 
673, 
674b
influenza immunizations, 
236b
Medicare Advantage, 
6, 
22
outpatient resource-based relative value scale, 
12–
17
adjustments, 
15
beneficiary protection, 
14
conversion factor, 
13–14
Geographic Practice Cost Index, 
13
limiting charge, 
14–15
Medicare Volume Performance Standards, 
14
relative value unit, 
13
site-of-service limitations, 
15
surgical procedures/supplies, 
16–17, 
375b, 
376b,
377b
uniformity provision, 
15
Part A, 
5–6
Part B, 
6
Part C, 
6
Part D, 
7
pneumococcal vaccines, 
673b
prescription drugs, 
7
RBRVS. Outpatient resource-based relative value
scale, 
above
,
skin closures, 
395
supplementary insurance, 
6
surgical modifier circumstances, 
16–17
surgical trays, 
375b
volume performance standards, 
14
Medication therapy management services, 
701
Medicine codes,
allergen immunotherapy, 
688
allergy immunology, 
688–689
allergy testing, 
688
anesthesia., 
 
See
 
Anesthesia
behavior assessment/intervention, 
692
biofeedback, 
678
cardiovascular system., 
 
See
 
Cardiovascular
system
chemotherapy., 
 
See
 
Chemotherapy
chiropractic manipulative treatment, 
700
clinical immunology, 
688–689
CNS assessments/tests, 
691
dermatological procedures, special, 
697
dialysis, 
678–681
endocrinology, 
689
gastroenterology, 
681
glucose monitoring, 
689
HCPCS., 
 
See
 
Healthcare Common Procedure
Coding System (HCPCS)
home health procedures/services, 
701
hydration services, 
692–694
immune globulins, 
671–672
influenza immunizations, 
674t
infusion services, 
693–694
home infusion procedures services, 
701
injection services., 
 
See
 
Injection services
medication therapy management services, 
701
muscle testing, 
689–691
National Codes., 
 
See
 
National Codes
neurologic function tests, 
689–691
non–face-to-face nonphysician services, 
700
nutritional therapy, medical, 
699
ophthalmologic services, 
682–683
osteopathic manipulative treatment, 
699
other services and procedures, 
701
otorhinolaryngologic services, special, 
684
photodynamic therapy, 
696
physical medicine and rehabilitation, 
697–698
pneumococcal immunizations, 
674t
psychiatric treatments, 
676–677, 
692
pulmonary tests/therapies, 
686–687
range-of-motion measurements, 
689, 
689f
sedation., 
 
See
 
Anesthesia
sleep testing, 
689
special services, procedures, and reports, 
700–701
transfusion medicine, 
661, 
662f
vaccines., 
 
See
 
Vaccines
vascular diagnostic studies, noninvasive, 
686
wound care management, 
698, 
699f
Medicine section, of the CPT manual, 
670.
  
See also
 
Medicine codes
format of, 
670–671
Meninges, 
600
Meningitis,
leptospirosis, aseptic meningitis in, 
84
pneumococcal, 
132b
Menstrual period, last, 
585
Mental disorders, 
128–130
psychiatric treatments, 
676–677, 
692
Mesentery, 
523
Metabolic diseases/disorders, 
124–127, 
125f
Methicillin susceptible 
Staphylococcus aureus
 infection, 
104t
Microbiology, 
662, 
662f
Miscarriages, 
589–590
Missed abortion, 
589–590
Mnemonic device for remembering classifications, 
40t
Modifiers,
anesthesia,
concurrent care modifiers, 
361–362
physical status modifiers, 
358–359, 
359f
CPT modifiers, 
212, 
213f, 
219, 
220f, 
254–279
anesthesia, 
above
,
CMS modifiers (-X), 
271
multiple modifiers, 
279
multiple procedures, 
261–263
Medicare surgical modifiers, 
16–17
nonessential modifiers, 
43
Mohs’ micrographic surgery, 
408–409, 
409f
Molecular pathology, 
658
Mosaicism, 
181
Mouth, 
510–512
candidiasis infection of, 
103
dentoalveolar structures, 
512
floor of, 
510–512
lips., 
 
See
 
Lips
palate, 
512
cleft, 
510, 
510f
salivary gland and ducts, 
512–513, 
513f
vestibule of, 
510
MRI, 
626, 
635, 
636f.
  
See also
 
Radiology
cardiac MRIs, 
493, 
493f
Müllerian ducts, 
563
Multiple coding, 
103
Muscle testing, 
689–691
Musculoskeletal system, 
159–163
arthrocentesis, 
425, 
425f
arthroscopy, 
432–433
arthroscopy codes, 
432–433
bone grafts, 
428
casts and strapping codes, 
430–431
coding tips, 
416–417
diseases of, 
159–163
dislocations, 
421f, 
422–430
electrical stimulation, 
428
endoscopy, 
432–433
excision, 
424
fixation devices, codes, 
426
foot repairs, 
429–430
format of subsection, 
416–417
fractures., 
 
See
 
Fractures
free osteocutaneous flaps, 
428
general exploration, 
424–427
grafts, 
427–428
implants, 
427–428
incisions, 
422–423
injection codes, 
424
interstitial fluid pressure, 
428
other procedures codes, 
428
pins, insertion of, 
426
removal, 
424–427
removal codes, 
424
spinal fixation, 
428–429
spinal instrumentation, 
429, 
429f
toe repairs, 
429–430
ultrasound stimulation, 
428
wires, insertion of, 
427
wound exploration, 
423
Myocardial infarction, 
144–146
acute, 
145b
Myringotomy, 
619
N
Nails, 
392–395
avulsion, 
393
debridement, 
392
Nasal fractures, 
418, 
418f
therapeutic fracture of nasal turbinate, 
444
National Codes (HCPCS)., 
 
See
 
Healthcare Common Procedure
Coding System (HCPCS)
National Provider Identification (NPI), 
9–10
Nebulizers, Medicare Part B payments for, 
19, 
686–687
NEC, 
43
Neck,
lymph nodes/vessels, 
501–503, 
502f
radical dissection, 
446
suprahyoid dissection, 
501
Negative Pressure Wound Therapy, 
699, 
699f
Neonatal critical care services, 
337
Neoplasms, 
111–120
bladder tumors, transurethral resection of, 
551–
552
cardiac, 
461–462
classifications, 
116
“history of, ”, 
119
malignancies., 
 
See
 
Cancer
pain related to, 
134
sequencing and complications, 
117–119
staging, 
116, 
117f, 
501
transplanted organ, malignant neoplasm
associated with, 
115
unknown site, 
120
unspecified site, 
120
Nephrectomy, 
541
Nephrolithotomy, 
539, 
540f
percutaneous, 
540
Nephrolithotripsy, 
540
Nephrostolithotomy, percutaneous, 
540
Nephrostomy, 
539
Nephrotomy, 
539
Nervous system, 
598–607
autonomic, 
605–607
brain, 
599
aneurysm, 
601
arteriovenous malformation, 
601
vascular disease, 
601
cerebrospinal fluid shunts, 
601–602, 
602f
CNS., 
 
See
 
Central nervous system
code assignments, 
600
diseases of, 
131–135, 
131f
dominant sides, 
135
nondominant sides, 
135
pain (non-psychological), 
132–135
extracranial nerves, 
605–607
meninges, 
600
peripheral, 
598–599, 
605–607
skull surgery, 
600–601
spine/spinal cord., 
 
See
 
Spine and spinal cord
Neuritis, rheumatoid, 
132b
Neurologic function tests, 
689–691
Neuroplasty, 
607
Neurovascular pedicle flap, 
402
Newborns,
anesthesia for infant less than 4 kg, 
273
care, 
336.
  
See also
 
Maternity care and delivery
congenital anomalies, 
179–182
critical care services, 
337
with Down syndrome, 
181b
perinatal guidelines, 
178–179
single live born, 
65b
No Map, 
33
Nonessential modifiers, 
43
Non–face-to-face physician services, 
335
Nonsegmental instrumentation, 
420f, 
429
NOS, 
43
death NOS, 
184
Nose, 
440–444
excision, 
441–442
foreign body, removal of, 
443
hemorrhage control,
anterior nasal packing, 
444, 
444f
posterior nasal packing, 
444, 
444f
incision, 
440–441, 
441f
introduction codes, 
442–443
lesions, excision or destruction of, 
442
nasal button, insertion of, 
442–443, 
443f
other procedures, 
443
polyps, 
441
excision of, 
442, 
442f
sinuses., 
 
See
 
Sinuses
turbinates, 
442
therapeutic fracture of, 
444
turbinate injections, 
442–443, 
443f
NPI (National Provider Identification), 
9–10
Nuclear cardiology, 
458–459
Nuclear medicine, 
647–648
Nursing facilities, 
327–329
discharge services, 
328
initial care, 
328
intermediate care facility, 
327
long-term care facility, 
328
other services, 
328–329
skilled nursing facility, 
327
subsequent care, 
328
Nutritional diseases/disorders, 
124–127, 
125f
Nutritional therapy, medical, 
699
O
Observation codes,
hospital, 
313-314.
  
See also
 
Hospital observation
services
outpatient reporting, 
67
Obstetrics coding, 
169.
  
See also
 
Maternity care and delivery;
  
See
also
 
Pregnancy
Ocular adnexa., 
 
See
 
Eye and ocular adnexa
Office/outpatient consultations, 
319
Office/outpatient services,
established patient services, 
311–313
Medicare coverage., 
 
See
 
Medicare program
new patient services, 
309
outpatient coding., 
 
See
 
Outpatient coding and
reporting
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting (ICD-10-CM manual),
accurate coding, 
82
acute conditions, 
90
adult abuse and neglect, 
199
Alphabetic Index, 
82
anemia, 
122–123, 
122f
behavioral disorders, 
128–130
blood and blood-forming organs, diseases of, 
121–
124, 
121f
burn injuries, 
191–193
child abuse and neglect, 
199
chromosomal abnormalities, 
179–182
chronic conditions, 
90
circulatory system diseases, 
140–146
clinical findings, not elsewhere classified, 
182–185
coagulation defects, 
123, 
123f
combination codes, 
92
congenital anomalies, 
179–182
connective tissue diseases, 
159–163
corrosions, 
191–193
delivery, first-listed diagnosis for, 
170–171
delivery, normal, 
173–174
diabetes mellitus, 
124–127, 
126f, 
127f
digestive system diseases, 
154–155, 
154f
ear diseases, 
138–140
ectopic pregnancy, 
174
endocrine disorders, 
124–127, 
125f
external causes, consequences of, 
186–203, 
186f
eye diseases, 
136–138
hemorrhagic conditions, 
123
high-risk patients, first-listed diagnosis for, 
170
hydatidiform mole, 
174, 
175f
hypertension in pregnancy, 
175
ill-defined conditions, 
182–185
immunity disorders, 
121–124
infectious and parasitic diseases., 
 
See
 
Infectious
and parasitic diseases
injury coding, 
186–203, 
186f
integral conditions, 
86
laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified, 
182–
185
lacerations, 
200
late effects codes, 
94–95
laterality in coding, 
31, 
97–98
maltreatment of persons, 
199
mastoid process, diseases of, 
138–140
medical care complications, 
202–203
mental disorders, 
128–130
metabolic disorders, 
124–127, 
125f
multiple coding, 
88
musculoskeletal system diseases, 
159–163
neoplasms., 
 
See
 
Neoplasms
nervous system diseases, 
131–135, 
131f
normal pregnancy, first-listed diagnosis for, 
170
nutritional disorders, 
124–127, 
125f
ocular adnexa, 
136–138
open wounds, 
200
organization of, 
82
perinatal guidelines, 
178–179
peripartum period, 
173
poisoning codes, 
186–197, 
186f, 
198f
postpartum period, 
173
pregnancy, conditions due to, 
169–177
punctures, 
200
purpura, 
123
reporting same diagnosis code more than once,
96–97
respiratory diseases, 
147–148
skin and subcutaneous tissue diseases, 
155–157
specificity in coding, 
84
surgical complications, 
202–203
symptoms and signs, 
182–185, 
183f
Tabular List, 
82
toxicity codes, 
195–197, 
198f
trimesters, 
171–172
underdosing codes, 
195–197, 
198f
wounds, 
200
Omentum, 
533
OMT, 
699
Oncology,
cancer., 
 
See
 
Cancer
radiation., 
 
See
 
Radiation oncology
Online medical evaluations, 
335
Onychocryptosis, 
393
removal of nail, 
393f
Open wounds, 
200
Operating microscope, 
618–621, 
621f
Operation., 
 
See also
 
Surgery/surgery codes
Ophthalmologic services, 
682–683
Orchiectomy, 
558
Orchiopexy, 
558–559
Organ or Disease Oriented Panels, 
653–654
Oscheoplasty, 
560
Ossicular chain, 
620
Ostectomy, 
405
Osteoarthritis, 
417–418
Osteopathic manipulative treatment, 
699
Osteoporosis, humerus fracture due to, 
190b
Ostomies, 
522, 
523f
Otoplasty, 
619
Otorhinolaryngologic services, special, 
684
Outpatient coding and reporting,
additional diagnoses, 
57–58
chronic diseases, 
71
coexisting conditions, 
68
E/M services, 
287b
established patient services, 
311–313
first-listed diagnoses, 
68
inpatient coding, distinguished, 
706–707
Medicare coverage., 
 
See
 
Medicare program
new patient services, 
309
observation stays, 
67
prenatal visits, 
76
surgery codes, 
57
therapeutic services, 
73
uncertain diagnoses, 
69, 
70b
Z codes., 
 
See
 
Z codes
Outpatient consultations, 
319
Outpatient resource-based relative value scale (RBRVS).,
 
See
 
Medicare program
Ovary., 
 
See
 
Oviduct/ovary
Oviduct/ovary, 
572f, 
582–583
excision, 
583
in vitro fertilization, 
584
incision, 
582–583
laparoscopy, 
583
lysis of adhesions, 
583
repair, 
583
Oxygen necessity, certificate for, 
247f
P
PACE, 
22
Pacemaker/cardioverter-defibrillator, 
462–464
Pacing, 
489
Pain,
chronic, 
134
medical device-related, 
202, 
203
neoplasm-related, 
134
non-psychological, 
132–135
postoperative, 
134
psychological, 
130
Palate, 
512
cleft, 
510, 
510f
Pancreas, 
532, 
595f, 
596
biopsy of, 
532
removal of, 
532
transplantation of, 
532
Pancreatitis, index entry for, 
90f
Panniculectomy, 
403–404, 
404f
Paracentesis, 
614
Parasitic diseases., 
 
See
 
Infectious and parasitic diseases
Parathyroid glands, 
596
excision, 
598
Paraurethral glands., 
 
See
 
Skene’s glands
Parentheses ( ), 
43
Parotid duct, 
513, 
513f
Past history, 
292
Pathology/laboratory section, of the CPT manual,
anatomic pathology, 
663
chemistry, 
658
clinical pathology, 
656–657
coagulation tests, 
659–661
cytogenic studies, 
663
cytopathology, 
663
drug assays, 
655
drug testing, 
654–655
evocative/suppression testing, 
656
format of, 
653
hematology, 
659–661
immunizations, 
671–674
immunology codes, 
661
microbiology, 
662, 
662f
molecular pathology, 
658
Organ or Disease Oriented Panels, 
653–654
surgical pathology, 
664–665
transfusion medicine, 
661, 
662f
urinalysis, 
658
Patient-activated event recorder, 
465
Patient-controlled analgesia, 
348, 
349f
Patient history., 
 
See
 
History
Pediatric critical care,
inpatient services, 
336–337
patient transport, 
336–337
Pediatrician visit, prebirth, 
55t
Pedicle flaps, 
402
Pelvic exenteration, 
549
Penicillin,
accidental poisoning from, 
197
allergy, personal history of, 
65b
Penile amputation, 
556
Penile implant, 
557
Penis,
excision, 
556–557
incisions, 
555
introduction codes, 
557
lesions, destruction of, 
556
repair, 
557
Percutaneous biopsy, 
424
Percutaneous skeletal fixation, 
419, 
420f
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, 
467, 
468f
Pericardiocentesis, 
461, 
461f
Pericarditis, 
91b
Pericardium, 
461.
  
See also
 
Cardiovascular system
coding of services, 
460
Perinatal guidelines, 
178–179
Perineoplasty, 
574
Perineum., 
 
See
 
Vulva, perineum, and introitus
Peripheral arterial disease rehabilitation, 
489–490
Peripheral nervous system, 
598–599, 
605–607
Peritoneal dialysis, 
678, 
679f
Peritoneum, 
533
Peyronie disease, 
556, 
556f
Pharyngitis, streptococcal, 
93b
Pharyngoplasty, 
515
Pharyngostomy, 
515
Pharynx, 
514–515
Photodynamic therapy, 
696
Physical medicine and rehabilitation, 
697–698
Pilonidal cysts, 
394
Pinch graft, 
400
Placeholder x, 
44f
Pleura., 
 
See
 
Lungs and pleura
Pleurectomy, 
450
Pneumococcal meningitis, 
132b
Pneumococcal vaccines, 
673b, 
674t
Pneumonia,
diagnostic radiology, 
70
integral conditions, 
86b, 
87b
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
due to, 
148b
Pneumonocentesis, 
450
Pneumonolysis, 
452
Pneumothorax injection, 
452
POA (Present on Admission), 
719
Point-of-Service (POS) benefits, 
22
Poisoning codes, 
186–203, 
186f
medication poisoning, 
195–197, 
198f
Polycythemia vera, 
74
Polyps,
endocervical polyps, 
577, 
577f
nasal polyps, 
441
excision of, 
442, 
442f
Polysomnography, 
690, 
690f
Postpartum care, 
585–586
Postpartum curettage, 
588
PPOs, 
21
Pre-anesthetic examination, 
364
Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs), 
21
Pregnancy., 
 
See also
 
Fetuses
abortions., 
 
See
 
Abortion services
amniocentesis, 
587
artificial insemination, 
581
birth., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
care during., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
conditions due to, 
169–177
diabetes mellitus in, 
177
ectopic, 
174, 
588, 
588f
first-listed diagnoses,
for delivery, 
170–171
in high-risk patients, 
170
in normal pregnancy, 
170
perinatal period, conditions originating in, 
179
first pregnancy without complication, 
77
HIV infection in, 
111
hydatidiform mole, 
174, 
175f, 
588f
hypertension in, 
175
in vitro fertilization, 
581, 
584
miscarriages, 
589–590
peripartum period, 
173
prebirth pediatrician visit, 
55t
pre-existing conditions, 
169
prenatal visits, 
76
second pregnancy without complication, 
77
spotting complicating, 
32b
trimesters, 
171–172
Prenatal visits, 
76
Presenting problem, nature of, 
307
Present on Admission (POA), 
719
Pressure ulcers, 
157, 
158f, 
404–405, 
405f
Preventive medicine services, 
334–335
Priapism, 
557
Problem focused examination, 
295
Proctosigmoidoscopy, 
524
Professional services (HCPCS), 
236–239
Program for All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE), 
22
Programmed stimulation, 
488–489
Prolonged physician services, 
331–333
Prostate, 
563–567
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 
563
biopsies, 
565–566
vesical neck and prostate codes, 
552
Prostate cancer,
biopsies, 
565–566
brachytherapy, 
566–567
Prostatectomy, 
563
Prostatotomy, 
566
Proton beam treatment delivery, 
646
Pseudoaneurysms, 
474
Pseudophakia, 
614
Psychiatric treatments, 
676–677, 
692–694
Psychiatrists, 
676
Psychological disorders, 
129–130
Psychological pain, 
130
Psychologists, 
676
Pulmonary tests/therapies, 
686–687
Punch biopsy, 
389, 
389f, 
556, 
556f
Puncture aspiration, 
383
Purpura, 
123
Pyeloplasty, 
542–543
Pyelostolithotomy, 
540
Q
QIO providers, 
5
Quadriplegia, functional,
184
Quality Improvement Organizations, 
5
R
Radiation oncology, 
642–647
clinical brachytherapy, 
646–647, 
647f
clinical treatment planning, 
642
dosimetry, 
643
hyperthermia, 
646
medical radiation physics, 
643
proton beam treatment delivery, 
646
radiation treatment delivery, 
644–645
radiation treatment management, 
645
simulation, 
642–643
special services, 
643
treatment devices, 
643
Radical lymphadenectomy, 
500
Radiofrequency energy, 
489
Radiologists, 
625
interventional, 
639
Radiology, 
625
anteroposterior body position, 
627, 
628f
axial projection, 
631, 
631f
body planes/positioning, 
626–631
cardiovascular codes., 
 
See
 
Cardiovascular system
component/combination coding, 
633
decubitus body positions, 
628–629, 
630f
diagnostic, 
635–637
distal body references, 
627, 
628f
global radiology service, 
491
Guidelines, 
632–635
intensity-modulated radiation treatment, 
644–645
lateral body positions, 
627–628, 
629, 
630f
Medically Unlikely Units, 
634–635
nuclear medicine, 
647–648
oblique views, 
629, 
630f, 
631
posteroanterior body position, 
627, 
628f, 
630f
prone body position, 
626, 
628, 
630f
proximal body references, 
627, 
628f
recumbent body position, 
629, 
630f
supervision and interpretation, 
633
supine body position, 
628, 
630f
tangential projections, 
631, 
631f
terminology, 
625
ultrasound., 
 
See
 
Ultrasound
“with contrast, ”, 
635
Radiology section, of the CPT manual,
format of, 
625
generally., 
 
See
 
Radiology
Radiotherapy,
brachytherapy., 
 
See
 
Brachytherapy
oncology., 
 
See
 
Radiation oncology
Range-of-motion measurements, 
689, 
689f
RBRVS., 
 
See
 
Medicare program
Rectum, 
524–528
endoscopic procedures, 
524–528
Referral, 
318
Regional anesthesia, 
347, 
349
Rehabilitation, 
697–698
Reimbursement,
managed health care, 
20–22
Medicare., 
 
See
 
Medicare program
Relative Value Guide
, 
352–354, 
353f
Renal cysts, 
542
Renal transplantation, 
202, 
541–542
Reproductive system(s),
female., 
 
See
 
Female genital system
male., 
 
See
 
Male genital system
procedures, 
571
Request for consultation, 
318
Requesting physician, 
318
Resequenced codes, 
213–214, 
214f
Resequencing, 
213–214
Resistant infections, 
104
Respiratory section, of the CPT manual, 
438
format of, 
438
Respiratory system, 
147–148, 
438f
bronchi., 
 
See
 
Trachea and bronchi
diseases of, 
147–148
endoscopy, 
438, 
439–440
locating codes, 
440
larynx., 
 
See
 
Larynx
lungs., 
 
See
 
Lungs and pleura
nose., 
 
See
 
Nose
pleura., 
 
See
 
Lungs and pleura
sinuses., 
 
See
 
Sinuses
trachea., 
 
See
 
Trachea and bronchi
Rest home services, 
330
Retinopathy,
diabetic retinopathy, with type I diabetes, 
89b,
126b
hypertensive, 
141
Retroperitoneal, 
538
Review of systems, 
291–292
Rheumatoid neuritis, 
132b
Rhinoplasty, 
443, 
510
Rhytidectomy, 
403–404
RNY gastric bypass, 
520, 
520f
Robertsonian translocation, 
181
Robotic assisted prostatectomy (RAP), 
565
Rotation flaps, 
398, 
399f
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 
520, 
520f
Rubella virus vaccine, 
672b, 
673b
Rule of Nines, 
406f
S
Salivary gland and ducts, 
512–513, 
513f
Salmonella paratyphi, 
arthritic joint due to, 
162b
Scenario field, 
33–34, 
34f
School maladjustment, 
64b
Scissors removal, 
389, 
390f
Scrotoplasty, 
560
Scrotum, 
560
Seafood allergy, 
55t
Sedation., 
 
See
 
Anesthesia
Segmental instrumentation, 
429, 
429f
Seldinger technique, 
486, 
486f
Seminal vesicles, 
562–563
Sentinel node biopsy, 
501b, 
503
Sepsis, 
105–106
Septic abortion, 
589
Septic shock, 
105–106
Septoplasty, 
443
Seton, 
529, 
530f
Seven-character code, 
85
Severe sepsis, 
105–106
Shoulder relocation, 
421, 
421f
Shunts, 
601–602
cerebrospinal fluid, 
601–602, 
602f
ventriculoperitoneal., 
 
See
 
Ventriculoperitoneal
shunts
Sigmoidoscopy, 
524–525
Signal-averaged electrocardiography, 
483
Signs, 
182–185
Sinuses,
accessory, 
445–446
displacement therapy, 
442–443
tract injection procedure codes, 
424
Sinusitis, acute maxillary, 
148b
Sinusotomies, 
446
SIRS (systemic inflammatory response syndrome), 
184
Six-character code, 
84–85
Skeletal system., 
 
See
 
Musculoskeletal system
Skeletal traction, 
419, 
420f
Skene’s glands, 
553, 
572
Skilled nursing facilities, 
327
Skin, subcutaneous, and accessory structures, 
155–157, 
383
burns, 
405–407, 
406f
burn treatment, 
406, 
406f, 
407
debridement, 
383–384
excision-debridement, 
384
grafting procedures., 
 
See
 
Skin grafts
hormone pellet implantation, 
395
image-guided fluid drainage, 
383
incision and drainage codes, 
383
lesions., 
 
See
 
Skin lesions
nails, 
392–395
nose biopsy, 
441
pilonidal cysts, 
394
wound repair., 
 
See
 
Wound repair
Skin flaps, 
401–402
rotation flaps, 
398, 
399f
Skin grafts,
adjacent tissue transfers, 
398
donor site, 
398
for facial nerve paralysis, 
404
recipient site, 
398
skin replacement surgery/skin substitutes, 
399–
401
Skin lesions, 
384–387
biopsies, 
388–389, 
409
breast procedures, 
410–411
closure of excision sites, 
387
cutting, 
387
destruction, 
385–387
other than excision, 
408–409
excision, 
385–387
benign lesions, 
390–391
malignant lesions, 
391, 
391f
paring, 
387
shaving of, 
390, 
390f
skin tags, 
389
types of, 
386f
Skin replacement surgery, 
399–401
Skin substitutes, 
399–401
Skin tags, 
389, 
390f
Skin traction, 
420f, 
422
Skull,
brain., 
 
See
 
Brain
burr holes, 
600–602
punctures, 
600–602
surgery,
craniectomy, 
600
craniotomy, 
600
skull base, 
600–601
twists, 
600–602
Sleep testing, 
689
Slit lamp, 
613
Social history, 
292
Special E/M services, 
335
Spermatic cord, 
561–562
Spinal anesthesia, 
347, 
349
Spinal cord., 
 
See
 
Spine and spinal cord
Spinal fixation, 
428–429
Spinal instrumentation, 
429, 
429f
Spinal tap, 
604, 
604f
Spine and spinal cord, 
599
autonomic nervous system, 
605–607
CNS., 
 
See
 
Central nervous system
coding procedures, 
602–607
extracranial nerves, 
605–607
peripheral nerves, 
605–607
Spine surgery codes, 
428
Spirometry, incentive, 
686–687, 
687f
Spleen, 
499
Splenoportography, 
499
Splints, 
430, 
431f
removal of, 
430
Spontaneous abortions, 
589
Staff Model HMOs, 
22
Staging neoplasms, 
501
Standby services, 
332–333
Staphylococcus aureus
 infection,
arthritic wrist due to, 
104t
cellulitis,
of the face, 
89b
of the finger, 
156b
methicillin susceptible, 
104t
Stem cell harvesting, 
499–500
Stensen’s duct, 
513, 
513f
Stents,
in the biliary tract, 
532
intracoronary placement, 
480, 
480f
prostatic, 
563
renal, 
542
Stimson technique, 
421, 
421f
Stoma, 
522, 
522f
Stomach, 
520
Strabismus surgery, 
615
Strangulated hernia, 
533
Strapping, 
430
codes, 
430–431
removal of, 
430
types of, 
431f
Streptococcal pharyngitis, 
93b
Stress tests, 
647–648
cardiovascular, 
481, 
481f
Stroke, 
83
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
84
Subclassifications, fourth- and fifth-digit, 
28
Subcutaneous structures., 
 
See
 
Skin, subcutaneous, and accessory
structures
Substance abuse/use, 
129, 
130f
Subungual hematoma, nails, 
393
Suppositories, vaginal, 
590
Suprahyoid neck dissection, 
501
Surfer’s ear, 
618
Surgery/surgery codes., 
See also specific anatomic/physiological sites
ambulatory surgery, 
27b, 
76b
bariatric surgery, 
520, 
520f
birthing., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
cardiovascular system., 
 
See
 
Cardiovascular
system
computer-assisted surgical navigation, 
428
deleted codes, 
371, 
371f
diaphragm, 
504
fine needle biopsies, 
377, 
377f
general subsection, 
377
global surgery period, 
374–375
integumentary system., 
 
See
 
Integumentary
system
intersex surgery, 
571
intestinal surgery, 
522
materials and supplies, 
375
maternity care., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
mediastinum, 
503–504
modifier circumstances, 
16–17
Mohs’ micrographic surgery, 
408–409, 
409f
musculoskeletal system., 
 
See
 
Musculoskeletal
system
outpatient coding and reporting, 
57
parathyroid glands, 
598
parenthetical phrases, 
370, 
370f
pathology codes, 
664–665
respiratory system., 
 
See
 
Respiratory system
separate procedures, 
372–373
skin replacement surgery, 
399–401
skull surgery,
craniectomy, 
600
craniotomy, 
600
skull base, 
600–601
special reports, 
372
surgical complications, 
202–203
surgical packages, 
374–377, 
375f
thyroid gland, 
597–598
unlisted procedures, 
371
Surgery Guidelines, 
368–371
unlisted procedures, 
371
Surgery section, of the CPT manual, 
368
birth deliveries., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
codes., 
 
See
 
Surgery/surgery codes
Guidelines., 
 
See
 
Surgery Guidelines
maternity care., 
 
See
 
Maternity care and delivery
“New Text” symbols, 
368, 
369f
notes, 
368–371, 
369f, 
370f
“Revised Text” symbols, 
368, 
369f
subsections,
auditory system., 
 
See
 
Auditory system
diaphragm, 
504
digestive system., 
 
See
 
Digestive system
ear., 
 
See
 
Ear
endocrine system, 
595–598, 
595f
hemic system., 
 
See
 
Hemic and lymphatic systems
lymphatic system., 
 
See
 
Hemic and lymphatic
systems
male genital system., 
 
See
 
Male genital system
mediastinum, 
503–504
nervous system., 
 
See
 
Nervous system
ocular adnexa., 
 
See
 
Eye and ocular adnexa
urinary system., 
 
See
 
Urinary system
Surgical complications, 
202–203
Surgical packages, 
374–377
Surgical pathology, 
664–665
Swan-Ganz catheter, 
351, 
352f
Symptoms, 
182–185
Synechiae,
anterior, 
614
posterior, 
614
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), 
184
T
Tabular List, 
39–41
Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting, 
82
Tandem cuff, 
554
Tattooing codes, 
394
Telephone services, 
335
Temporary procedure (HCPCS), 
236–239
TENS, certificate for, 
246f
Testis, 
558–559
Tetanus toxoid vaccine, 
672b, 
673b
Third-party reimbursement,
managed health care, 
20–22
Medicare., 
 
See
 
Medicare program
Thoracentesis, 
451, 
451f, 
452f
Thoracoplasty, 
452
Thoracoscopy, 
439
Thoracotomy, 
439, 
450
Three-character code, 
84
Thrombectomy, 
473
Thrombolysis, 
479
Thrombus, 
473
Thymus gland, 
595f, 
596
Thyroid gland, 
596
incision and excision, 
597–598
Thyroiditis, 
91b
Tibia, areas of, 
419, 
420f
Tissue-expander codes, 
394
Tissue grafts,
musculoskeletal system, 
428
skin., 
 
See
 
Skin grafts
Tissue mosaicism, 
181
Toenails, 
392–395
ingrown, 
393, 
393f
Toe repairs, 
429–430
Tomography, 
626.
  
See also
 
Radiology
Tongue, 
510–512
Tongue tie, 
511, 
511f
Tonsillectomy, 
514–515
Tonsils, 
514–515
Topical anesthesia, 
347
Total pelvic exenteration, 
549
Toxicity codes, 
195–197, 
198f
Toxoids, 
671–674
immunization administration for, 
672–673
Trabeculectomy ab externo, 
614–615
Trachea and bronchi, 
448–449
excision, 
449
incision, 
448
introduction codes, 
449
repair procedures, 
449
Trachelorrhaphy, 
578
Tracheoplasty, 
449
Tracheostomy, 
448, 
448f
Traction, 
420, 
420f
Transconjunctival approach, 
615, 
615f
Transcutaneous electrical nerve simulation, certificate for, 
246f
Transfusion medicine, 
661, 
662f
Transitional care management services, 
338
Transmyocardial revascularization, 
462
Transplantation,
bone marrow, 
499–500
complications from, 
202, 
203
kidney, 
202, 
541–542
liver, 
531
malignant neoplasms associated with, 
115
pancreas, 
532
Transtracheal tracheostomy, 
448, 
448f
Transurethral incision of the prostate (TUIP), 
563
Transurethral microwave heat treatment (TUMT), 
563
Transurethral needle ablation (TUNA), 
563
Transurethral resection of a bladder tumor, 
551–552
Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP), 
563
Transurethral surgery, 
551–552
Transverse wedge excision, 
509
Trisomy 21, 
181
Tubal ligation, 
582–583
Tube graft, 
401, 
402f
Tumors., 
 
See
 
Neoplasms
Tunica vaginalis, 
560
Turbinate injections, 
442–443, 
443f
Tympanostomy, 
619
U
Ulcers,
gastric, 
86b
pressure., 
 
See
 
Pressure ulcers
sacral, 
399f
Ultrasound,
A-mode, 
640
B-scan, 
640
coronary vessels, 
479–480
diagnostic, 
638–641
Doppler, 
641
echocardiography, 
484–485, 
485f, 
686
examinations, 
640
gallstone, ultrasound showing, 
639f
intravascular, 
480
M-mode, 
640
modes and scans, 
640–641
musculoskeletal system stimulation, 
428
real-time scan, 
641
transrectal, 
567
Ultraviolet light therapy, 
697
Uncertain diagnoses,
inpatient coding and reporting, 
714–715, 
719b
outpatient coding and reporting, 
69
Underdosing codes, 
195–197, 
198f
Undescended testis, 
558–559
Unit/floor time, 
307
Urachal cyst, 
549
Ureter, 
538f, 
545–547
endoscopy, 
546–547
excision, 
545
incision, 
545
introduction codes, 
546
laparoscopy, 
546
repair procedures, 
546
Ureterolithotomy, 
545
Ureterolysis, 
546
Ureteroneocystostomy, 
546
Ureteroplasty, 
546
Ureteropyelostomy, 
546
Urethra, 
538f, 
553–554
excision, 
553–554
incision, 
553
manipulation codes, 
554
repair procedures, 
554
Urethrectomy, 
553–554
Urethromeatoplasty, 
554
Urethroplasty, 
554
Urinalysis, 
658
Urinary system, 
538–554, 
538f
bladder., 
 
See
 
Bladder
E. coli
 infection, 
55t
format of subsection, 
538–554
kidneys., 
 
See
 
Kidneys
ureter., 
 
See
 
Ureter
urethra., 
 
See
 
Urethra
Urinary tract infection, 
103
Urine, aspiration of, 
548
Urodynamics, 
550
“Use additional code” note, 
46
Uvula, 
512
V
Vaccines, 
671–674
immunization administration for, 
672–673
Vagina, 
575–577
biopsies, 
577
destruction, 
575
endocervical polyps, 
577, 
577f
endoscopy, 
577
excision, 
575
insertion of devices, 
575–576, 
576f
introduction codes, 
575–576
irrigation, 
575–576
manipulation of, 
577
repair, 
576–577
suppositories, 
590
Valvuloplasty, 
481
Varicella virus vaccine, 
672b
Varicocele, on spermatic cord, 
561–562
Vascular diagnostic studies, noninvasive, 
686
Vas deferens, 
561
Vasectomy, 
561
Vasogram, 
561
Vasotomy, 
561
Vasovasorrhaphy, 
561
Vasovasostomy, 
561
Veins, 
470f
Ventricular puncture, 
600
Ventriculoperitoneal shunts, 
601–602, 
602f
laminectomy, 
603, 
604f
lumbar puncture, 
604, 
604f
Vermilionectomy, 
509
Vermillion border, 
509f
Vertebrae, 
603f
fractures, 
85
Vertebral column, 
603f
Vesiculotomy, 
563
Vulva, perineum, and introitus, 
572–574
destruction, 
573
excision, 
573
incision, 
573
repair, 
574
Vulvectomy, 
573
V-Y plasty, 
398
W
“with, ”, 
44
Wound(s), 
200
gunshot, 
423
knife, 
423
repair., 
 
See
 
Wound repair
types of, 
396f
Wound repair, 
395–405
abrasion codes, 
403
active care management, 
698, 
699f
blepharoplasty, 
403–404
burn treatment, 
406, 
406f
cervicoplasty, 
403–404
chemical peels, 
403, 
403f
complex repairs, 
397
components, 
398
debridement, 
385, 
398, 
399f
dermabrasion, 
403, 
403f
exploration, 
398
factors, 
395–397
grafting procedures., 
 
See
 
Skin grafts
intermediate repairs, 
397
ligation, 
398
lipectomy, 
404
pressure ulcers, 
404–405, 
405f
rhytidectomy, 
403–404
simple repairs, 
395
W-plasty, 
398
X
X-ray films, 
635.
  
See also
 
Radiology
Z
Z codes, 
58–66
assignment of, 
64–65
External Cause Index, 
62–63, 
63f
“history of” disease, 
66
index locations, 
63
status codes, 
60
Z-plasty, 
398, 
399f
